THE ESSENCE OF BUDDHISM.


All beings desire happiness; therefore to all extend your
benevolence.--Mahavamsa.

Because he has pity upon every living creature, therefore is a man
called "holy."--Dhammapada.

Like as a mother at the risk of her life watches over her only child,
so also let every one cultivate towards all beings a boundless
(friendly) mind.--Metta-sutta.

Hurt not others with that which pains yourself.--Udanavarga.

I cannot have pleasure while another grieves and I have power to help
him.--Jatakamala.

With pure thoughts and fulness of love, I will do towards others what
I do for myself.--Lalita Vistara.

If you desire to do something pleasing to me, then desist from hunting
forever! The poor poor beasts of the forest, being ... dull of
intellect, are worthy of pity for this very reason.--Jatakamala.

You will generously follow the impulse of pity, I hope.--Jatakamala.

    For that they hated this poor slender boy,
    That ever frowned upon their barbarous sports,
    And loved the beasts they tortured in their play,
    And wept to see the wounded hare, or doe,
    Or trout that floundered on the angler's hook.

--Lloyd "Nichiren."

Good men melt with compassion even for one who has wrought them
harm.--Kshemendra's Avadana Kalpalata.

Though a man with a sharp sword should cut one's body bit by bit, let
not an angry thought ... arise, let the mouth speak no ill
word.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Them who became thy murderers, thou forgavest.--Lalita Vistara.

Overcome evil by good.--Udanavarga.

Conquer your foe by force, and you increase his enmity; conquer by
love, and you reap no after-sorrow.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

This great principle of returning good for evil.--Sutra of Forty-two
Sections.

The member of Buddha's order ... should not intentionally destroy the
life of any being, down even to a worm or an ant.--Mahavagga.

Whether now any man kill with his own hand, or command any other to
kill, or whether he only see with pleasure the act of killing--all is
equally forbidden by this law.--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

My teaching is this, that the slightest act of charity, even in the
lowest class of persons, such as saving the life of an insect out of
pity, that this act ... shall bring to the doer of it consequent
benefit.--T'sa-ho-hom-king.

He came to remove the sorrows of all living
things.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

"Now (said he) I will see a noble law, unlike the worldly methods
known to men, ... and will fight against the chief wrought upon man by
sickness, age, and death."--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

To a righteous man death must bring gladness. For no fear of mishap
exists for him who is devoted to a holy life.--Jatakamala.

He lives only to be a help to others.--Questions of King Milinda.

Why should we cling to this perishable body? In the eye of the wise, the
only thing it is good for is to benefit one's fellow-creatures.--Katha
Sarit Sagara.

Is not all I possess, even to my very body, kept for the benefit of
others?--Nagananda.

All men should cultivate a fixed and firm determination, and vow that what
they once undertake they will never give up.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Rather will I fall headlong into hell ... than do a deed that is
unworthy.--Jataka.

May my body be ground to powder small as the mustard-seed if I ever
desire to (break my vow)!--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Happy is he that is virtuous--Dhammapada.

To make an end of selfishness is happiness.--Udanavarga.

There is no happiness except in righteousness.--Attanagalu-vansa.

Full of love for all things in the world, practicing virtue in order
to benefit others--this man only is happy.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

He that loveth iniquity beckoneth to misfortune.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

Watch your thoughts.--Dhammapada.

Control your tongue.--Dhammapada.

Have a strict control over your passions.--Story of Sundari and Nanda.

The higher life maketh he known, in all its purity and in all its
perfectness.--Tevijja-sutta.

So imbued were they with lovingkindness that all the birds and animals
loved them and harmed them not.--Sama Jataka (Burmese version).

Compassionate and kind to all creatures that have
life.--Brahma-jala-sutta.

    The birds and beasts and creeping things--'tis writ--
    Had sense of Buddha's vast embracing love,
    And took the promise of his piteous speech.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

He cherished the feeling of affection for all beings as if they were
his only son.--Lalita Vistara.

    Closely as cause and effect are bound together,
    So do two loving hearts entwine and live--
    Such is the power of love to join in one.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

                That thou mayst know--
    What others will not--that I love thee most
    Because I loved so well all living souls.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Always give in charity to people of good conduct.--Jatakamala.

With every desire to do good, the ignorant and foolish only succeed in
doing harm.... 'Tis knowledge crowns endeavor with success.--Jataka.

There is no sweet companion like pure charity.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Almsgiving, it is said, constitutes the value of riches.--Jatakamala.

Good is restraint in all things.--Dhammapada.

Unselfishness, true, and self-control.--Jataka.

The religious mendicant, wisely reflecting, is patient under cold and
heat, under hunger and thirst, ... under bodily sufferings, under
pains however sharp.--Sabbasava-sutta.

Though a man conquer a thousand thousand men in battle, a greater
conqueror still is he who conquers himself.--Udanavarga.

Root out the love of self.--Jataka.

The man of honor should minister to his friends ... by liberality,
courtesy, benevolence, and by doing to them as he would be done
by.--Sigalovada-sutta.

Practice the art of "giving up."--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Speak not harshly to anybody.--Dhammapada.

May I speak kindly and softly to every one I chance to
meet.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Offensive language is harsh even to the brutes.--Suttavaddhananiti.

Courtesy is the best ornament. Beauty  without courtesy is like a
grove without flowers.--Buddha-charita.

He knew not the art of hypocrisy.--Jatakamala.

Let a man say that which is right, not that which is unrighteous, ...
that which is pleasing, not that which is unpleasing, ... that which
is true, not that which is false.--Subhasita-sutta.

As he who loves life avoids poison, so let the sage avoid
sinfulness.--Udanavarga.

He sees danger in even the least of those things he should
avoid.--Tevijja-sutta.

Sin easily develops.--Rock Inscriptions of Asoka.

May I never do, nor cause to be done, nor contemplate the doing of,
even the most trivial sin!--Attanagalu-vansa (conclusion).

Let not one who is asked for his pardon withhold it.--Mahavagga.

'T is wrong to conquer him who sues for mercy.--Lalita Vistara.

Let none out of anger or resentment wish harm to
another.--Metta-sutta.

Let us then live happily, not hating those who hate us. In the midst
of those who hate us, let us dwell free from hatred.--Dhammapada.

For hatred does not cease by hatred at any time; hatred ceases by
love; this is an old rule.--Dhammapada.

(To the) self-reliant there is strength and
joy.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Let him not grieve for that which is lost.--Attadanda-sutta.

Not from weeping or grieving will any obtain peace of
mind.--Salla-sutta.

At first my sorrowing heart was heavy; but now my sorrow has brought
forth only profit.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Give to him that asketh, even though it be but a little.--Udanavarga.

He delights in giving so far as he is able.--Questions of King
Milinda.

Your guileless heart loves to exercise its
charity.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Always intent on bringing about the good and the happiness of
others.--Jatakamala.

Earnestly practice every good work.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

If they may cause by it the happiness of others, even pain is highly
esteemed by the righteous, as if it were gain.--Jatakamala.

When pure rules of conduct are observed, then there is true
religion.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Wherein does religion consist?

In (committing) the least possible harm, in (doing) abundance of good,
in (the practice of) pity, love, truth, and likewise purity of
life.--Pillar Inscriptions of Asoka.

(Not superstitious rites, but) kindness to slaves and servants,
reverence towards venerable persons, self-control with respect to
living creatures, ... these and similar (virtuous actions are the
rites which ought indeed to be performed.)--Rock Inscriptions of
Asoka.

The practice of religion involves as a first principle a loving,
compassionate heart for all creatures.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Shall we in worshipping slay that which hath life? This is like those
who practice wisdom, and the way of religious abstraction, but neglect
the rules of moral conduct.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

How can a system requiring the infliction of misery on other beings be
called a religious system?... To seek a good by doing an evil is
surely no safe plan.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

    Unto the dumb lips of his flock he lent
    Sad pleading words, showing how man, who prays
    For mercy to the gods, is merciless.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

I then will ask you, if a man, in worshipping ... sacrifices a sheep, and
so does well, wherefore not his child, ... and so do better? Surely ...
there is no merit in killing a sheep!--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

                    Nor [shall one] lay
    Upon the brow of innocent bound beasts
    One hair's weight of that answer all must give
    For all things done amiss or wrongfully.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

    Doing no injury to any one,
    Dwell in the world full of love and kindness.

--Questions of King Milinda.

    Ministering to the worthy, doing harm to none,
    Always ready to render reverence to whom it is due.
    Loving righteousness and righteous conversation,
    Ever willing to hear what may profit another.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

    Scrupulously avoiding all wicked actions;
    Reverently performing all virtuous ones;
    Purifying his intention from all selfish ends:
    This is the doctrine of all the Buddhas.

--Siau-chi-kwan.

Instruct yourself (more and more) in the highest
morality.--Nagarjuna's "Friendly Epistle."

Cultivate compassion.--Visuddhi-Magga.

May my thoughts, now small and narrow, expand in the next existence,
that I may understand the precepts ... thoroughly, and never break
them or be guilty of trespasses.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Religion he looks upon as his best ornament.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The sinner is never beautiful.--Lalita Vistara.

Use no perfume but sweetness of thoughts.--Siamese Buddhist Maxim.

Wealth and beauty, scented flowers and ornaments like these, are not
to be compared for grace with moral rectitude!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He who ... cannot feel joy to see merit in others is stained with the
darkness of sin.--Story of Pratiharyya.

Ask not of (a person's) descent, but ask about his
conduct--Sundarikabharadvaja-sutta.

The young man Vasettha said: "When one is virtuous and full of (good)
works, in this way he becomes a Brahman."--Vasettha-sutta.

Not by birth does one become low caste, not by birth a Brahman; by his
deeds he becomes low caste, by his deeds he becomes a
Brahman.--Vasala-sutta.

Whosoever strikes, or by words annoys, mother or father, brother or
sister, ... let us know such as a "base-born."--Vasala-sutta.

Causing destruction to living beings, killing and mutilating, ...
stealing and speaking falsely, fraud and deception, ... these are
(what defile a man).--Amagandha-sutta.

Whosoever ... harms living beings, ... and in whom there is no
compassion for them, let us know such as a "base-born."--Vasala-sutta.

In whom there is truth and righteousness, he is blessed, he is a
Brahman.--Dhammapada.

Whoso hurts not (living) creatures, whether those that tremble or
those that are strong, nor yet kills nor causes to be killed, him do I
call a Brahman.--Vasettha-sutta.

Whoso is (entirely) divested of sin, as is the heaven of mire and the
moon of dust, him do I call a Brahman.--Udanavarga.

Him I call indeed a Brahman who, though he be guilty of no offense,
patiently endures reproaches, bonds, and stripes.--Dhammapada.

We will patiently suffer threats and blows at the hands of foolish
men.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Who, though he be cursed by the world, yet cherishes no ill-will
towards it.--Sammaparibbajaniya-sutta.

Persecutions and revilings, murders and numberless imprisonments,
these hast thou suffered in thousands from the world, verily
delighting in long-suffering.--Lalita Vistara.

At the end of life the soul goes forth alone; whereupon only our good
deeds befriend us.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The wrongdoer, devoid of rectitude, ... is full of anxiety when death
arrives.--Mahaparinibbana-sutta.

He who has done what is right is free from fear.--Udanavarga.

No fear has any one of me; neither have I fear of any one: in my
good-will to all I trust.--Introduction to the Jataka.

Our deeds, whether good or evil, ... follow us as
shadows.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

    He who now gives in charity
    Shall surely reap where he has given;
    For whosoever piously bestows a little water
    Shall receive return like the great ocean.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Covetous desire is the greatest (source of) sorrow. Appearing as a
friend, in secret 'tis our enemy.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

That which is given in charity is rich in returns; therefore charity is
a true friend; although it scatters it brings no
remorse.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He who stints the profit he has made, his wealth will soon be spent
and lost.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The (real) treasure is that laid up ... through charity and piety,
temperance and self-control.... The treasure thus hid is secure, and
passes not away. Though he leave the fleeting riches of the world,
this a man carries with him--a treasure that no wrong of others, and
no thief, can steal.--Nidhikanda-sutta.

Think of all sentient beings as thy children.--Tenets of the Soto
Sect.

Though exalted, forget not the lowly.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

Be kind to all that lives.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Filled with compassion for all creatures.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Of all possessions, contentedness is the best by far.--Nagarjuna's
"Friendly Epistle."

A contented mind is always joyful.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Let us then live happily, though we call nothing our own.--Dhammapada.

    Not the whole world, ... the ocean-girt earth,
    With all the seas and the hills that girdle it,
    Would I wish to possess with shame added thereto.

--Questions of King Milinda.

Let none be forgetful of his own duty for the sake of
another's.--Dhammapada.

The faults of others are easily seen; one's own faults are difficult
to see.--Udanavarga.

Self-examination is painful.--Pillar Inscriptions of Asoka.

A man winnows his neighbor's faults like chaff: his own he hides, as a
cheat the bad die from the gambler.--Dhammapada.

She orders her household aright, she is hospitable to kinsmen and
friends, a chaste wife, a thrifty housekeeper, skilful and diligent in
all her duties.--Sigalovada-sutta.

The wife ... should be cherished by her husband.--Sigalovada-sutta.

Were I not ready to suffer adversity with my husband as well as to
enjoy happiness with him, I should be no true wife.--Legend of
We-than-da-ya.

It is better to die in righteousness than to live in
unrighteousness.--Loweda Sangrahaya.

Better to fling away life than transgress our convictions of
duty.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Better for me to die battling (with the temper) than that I should
live defeated.--Padhana-sutta.

The loving Father of all that lives.--Tsing-tu-wan.

Our loving Father, and Father of all that breathes.--Daily Manual of
the Shaman.

Even so of all things that have ... life, there is not one that (the
Buddhist anchorite) passes over; ... he looks upon all with ...
deep-felt love. This, verily, ... is the way to a state of union with
God.--Tevijja-sutta.

    Doubts will exist as long as we live in the world.
    Yet, pursuing with joy the road of virtue,
    Like the man who observes the rugged path along the precipice, we ought
    Gladly and profitably to follow it.

--Siau-chi-kwan.

To feed a single good man is infinitely greater in point of merit,
than attending to questions about heaven and earth, spirits and
demons, such as occupy ordinary men.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

What is goodness? First and foremost the agreement of the will with
the conscience.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

If you remove (from conduct) the purpose of the mind, the bodily act
is but as rotten wood. Wherefore regulate the mind, and the body of
itself will go right.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Keep watch over your hearts.--Mahaparinibbana-sutta.

Let no evil desire whatever arise within you.--Cullavagga.

So soon as there springs up within him an angry, malicious thought,
some sinful, wrong disposition, ... he puts it away, removes it,
destroys it, he makes it not to be.--Sabbasava-sutta.

With not a thought of selfishness or covetous
desire.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Covetousness and anger are as the serpent's
poison.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

They who do evil go to hell; they who are righteous go to
heaven.--Dhammapada.

He who, doing what he ought, ... gives pleasure to others, shall find
joy in the other world.--Udanavarga.

The virtuous (when injured) grieve not so much for their own pain as
for the loss of happiness incurred by their injurers.--Jatakamala.

    He truly must have a loving heart,
    For all things living place in him entire confidence.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

    Ofttimes while he mused--as motionless
    As the fixed rock his seat--the squirrel leaped
    Upon his knee, the timid quail led forth
    Her brood between his feet, and blue doves pecked
    The rice-grains from the bowl beside his hand.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Those who search after truth should have a heart full of
sympathy.--Story of Virudhaka.

This (prince) feels for the welfare of the multitude.--Nalaka-sutta.

The Royal Prince, perceiving the tired oxen, ... the men toiling
beneath the midday sun, and the birds devouring the hapless insects,
his heart was filled with grief, as a man would feel upon seeing his
own household bound in fetters: thus was he touched with sorrow for
the whole family of sentient creatures--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

This king felt the weal and the woe of his subjects as his
own.--Jatakamala.

What is a true gift?
One for which nothing is expected in return.--Prasnottaramalika.

There is a way of giving, seeking pleasure by it (or) coveting to get
more; some also give to gain a name for charity, some to gain the
happiness of heaven.... But yours, O friend, is a charity free from
such thoughts, the highest and best degree of charity, free from
self-interest or thought of getting more.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

'Tis thus men generally think and speak, they have a reference in all they
do to their own advantage. But with this one it is not so: 'tis the good of
others and not his own that he seeks.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Above all things be not careless; for carelessness is the great foe to
virtue.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

You say that while young a man should be gay, and when old then
religious.... Death, however, as a robber, sword in hand, follows us
all, desiring to capture his prey: how then should we wait for old
age, ere we turn our minds to religion?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

If you urge that I am young and tender, and that the time for seeking
wisdom is not yet, then you should know that to seek true religion,
there never is a time not fit.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Work out your own salvation with diligence.--Mahaparinibbana-sutta.

No man can purify another.--Dhammapada.

The good man's love ends in love; the bad man's love in
hate.--Kshemendra's Kalpalata.

He who holds up a torch to (lighten) mankind is always honored by
me.--Rahula-sutta.

Where there is uprightness, wisdom is there, and where there is
wisdom, uprightness is there.--Sonadanda-sutta.

Liberty, courtesy, benevolence, unselfishness, under all circumstances
towards all people--these qualities are to the world what the linchpin
is to the rolling chariot.--Sigalovada-sutta.

Let us be knit together ... as friends.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Since even animals can live together in mutual reverence, confidence,
and courtesy, much more should you, O Brethren, so let your light
shine forth that you ... may be seen to dwell in like manner
together.--Cullavagga.

Trust is the best of relationships.--Dhammapada.

Faithful and trustworthy, he injures not his fellow-man by
deceit.--Tevijja-sutta.

Worship consists in fulfilling the design (of the person honored), not
in offerings of perfumes, garlands, and the like.--Jatakamala.

Compassion for all creatures is the true religion.--Buddha-charita.

The wise firmly believe that in Mercy the whole of Righteousness is
contained. What virtue ... does there exist which is not the
consequence of Mercy?--Jatakamala.

Even if a man have done evil a hundred times, let him not do it
again.--Udanavarga.

He who, having been angered, gives way to anger no more, has achieved
a mighty victory.--Udanavarga.

Better than sovereignty over this earth, ... better than lordship over
all worlds, is the recompense of the first step in holiness.--Dhammapada.

Now many distinguished warriors thought: we who go (to war) and find
our delight in fighting, do evil.... What shall we do that we may
cease from evil and do good?--Mahavagga.

Victory breeds hatred.--Dhammapada.

Therefore has this pious inscription been carved here (on the rock),
to the end that posterity may not suppose that any further conquest
ought to be made by them. Let them not hold that conquest by the sword
is worthy the name of conquest; let them see in it only confusion and
violence. Let them reckon as true conquests none save the triumphs of
religion.--Rock Inscriptions of Asoka.

He walks not in religion in a quarrelsome spirit.--Questions of King
Milinda.

Nay, ... let not quarrel arise, nor strife, nor discord, nor
dispute.--Mahavagga.

Thus he lives as a binder together of those who are divided, an
encourager of those who are friends, a peace-maker, a lover of peace,
impassioned for peace, a speaker of words that make for
peace.--Tevijja-sutta.

It is not as a means of procuring my own happiness that I give in charity,
but I love charity that I may do good to the world.--Jatakamala.

Benevolence is the doing of righteous acts of help to living creatures
whether of high or low degree; as when we help a tortoise in trouble,
or a sick sparrow, without looking for any reward.--Tenets of the Soto
Sect.

'Tis out of mercy, not with the desire of gain, that the virtuous take
care of a person in distress, nor do they mind whether the other
understands this or not.--Jatakamala.

Let him that has a merciful character be my friend.--Bhakti Sataka.

If a man thus walks in the ways of compassion, is it possible that he
should hurt anything intentionally?--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

Living in the world, and doing no harm to aught that
lives.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

As he said so he acted.--Vangisa-sutta.

Those who have sin at heart, but are sweet of speech, are like a
pitcher smeared with nectar, but full of poison.--Lalita Vistara.

Like a ... flower that is rich in color, but has no scent, so are the
fine ... words of him who does not act accordingly.--Dhammapada.

The mind must be brought under perfect subjection.--Inscription on
Votive Images.

He whose mind is subdued and perfectly controlled is
happy.--Udanavarga.

If only the thoughts be directed to that which is right, then
happiness must necessarily follow.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

Evil he overcame by righteousness.--Questions of King Milinda.

He felt compassion towards those who tormented him.--Attanagalu-vansa.

The bearer of ill-will towards them that bear ill-will can never
become pure; but he who bears no ill-will pacifies them that
hate.--Udanavarga.

The man who foolishly does me wrong, I will return him the protection
of my ungrudging love.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

Whether of the higher class of beings, as ... a perfect man, ... or of the
lower class of beings, as a grasshopper or the smallest insect--in one
word, whatever hath life thou shalt not kill.--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

To whom even the life of a serpent is sacred.--Lalita Vistara.

I love living things that have no feet, ... four-footed creatures, and
things with many feet.... May all creatures, all things that live, all
beings of whatever kind, may they all behold good fortune.--Cullavagga.

You do not well enticing me to a sinful act. And what you say, that
"nobody else will know of it"--will it be less sinful for this
reason?--Jatakamala.

There is no such thing as secrecy in wrongdoing.--Jataka.

Even could she have kept it secret from men, ... could she have kept
it secret from spirit, ... could she have kept it secret from the
gods, yet she could not have escaped herself from the knowledge of her
sin.--Questions of King Milinda.

Clad in garments pure as the moonbeams, ... her ornaments modesty and
virtuous conduct.--Ajanta Cave Inscriptions.

If you speak ... to a woman, do it with pureness of heart.... Say to
yourself: "Placed in this sinful world, let me be as the spotless
lily, unsoiled by the mire in which it grows." Is she old? regard her
as your mother. Is she honorable? as your sister. Is She of small
account? as a younger sister. Is she a child? then treat her with
reverence and politeness.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

    Gentle and true, simple and kind was she,
    Noble of mien, with gracious speech to all,
    And gladsome looks--a pearl of womanhood.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Do not have evil-doers for friends.... Take as your friends the best
of men.--Dhammapada.

    Briefly I will tell you the marks of a friend--
    When doing wrong, to warn; when doing well, to exhort to perseverance;
    When in difficulty or danger, to assist, relieve, and deliver.
    Such a man is indeed a true and illustrious friend.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

His friendship is prized by the gentle and the
good.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Living ... without cruelty among the cruel.--Udanavarga.

The Scripture said: "Be kind and benevolent to every being, and spread
peace in the world.... If it happen that thou see anything to be
killed, thy soul shall be moved with pity and compassion. Ah, how
watchful should we be over ourselves!"--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

I desire to produce in myself a loving heart towards all living
creatures.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Let us then practice good works, and inspect our thoughts that we do
no evil.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Now, therefore, it behooves me to examine into my faults; and if I
find anything wrong in me, to put it away, and practice virtue
only.--Jataka.

Therefore ... we would humble ourselves and repent us of our sins. Oh!
that we may have strength to do so aright!--Liturgy of Kwan-yin.

If we know that we have done wrong, and yet refuse to acknowledge it,
we are guilty of prevarication.--Chinese Pratimoksha.

From the very first, ... having no wish to benefit others, or to do
good in the least degree, we have been adding sin unto sin; and even
though our actual crimes have not been so great, yet a wicked heart
has ruled us within. Day and night, without interval or hesitation,
have we continually contrived how to do wrong.--Liturgy of Kwan-yin.

Accept the confession I make of my sin in its sinfulness, to the end
that in future I may restrain myself therefrom.--Cullavagga.

He who offends an offenseless man, ... against such a fool the evil
reverts, like fine dust thrown against the wind.--Kokaliya-sutta.

May wisdom be with me always.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

The fool who knows his foolishness is wise at any rate so far. But the
fool who thinks himself wise, he is a fool indeed.--Dhammapada.

He who holds back rising anger like a rolling chariot--him I call a
real driver: other people are merely holding the reins.--Dhammapada.

Anger, alas! how it changes the comely face! how it destroys the
loveliness of beauty!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The fool who is angered, and thinks to triumph by the use of abusive
language, is always vanquished by him whose words are patient.--Udanavarga.

He who lives far from me yet walks righteously, is ever near
me.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He sought after the good of those dependent on him.--Questions of King
Milinda.

Who, though he be lord over others, is patient with those that are
weak.--Udanavarga.

Loving her maids and dependents even as herself.--Lalita Vistara.

Loving all things which live even as themselves.--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Hear ye all this moral maxim, and having heard it keep it well: Whatsoever
is displeasing to yourselves never do to another.--Bstanhgyur.

Then declared he unto them (the rule of doing to others what we
ourselves like).--San-kiao-yuen-lieu.

From henceforth ... put away evil and do good.--Jataka.

At morning, noon, and night successively, store up good
works.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Always doing good to those around you.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

In order to terminate all suffering, be earnest in performing good
deeds.--Buddhaghosa's parables.

Compassion alone sanctifies the good.--Kshemendra's Avadana Kalpalata.

Religion means self-sacrifice.--Rukemavati.

O Buddha, the worship of thee consists in doing good to the
world.--Bhakti Sataka.

Persist not in calling attention to a matter calculated to cause
division.--Patimokkha.

Dwell together in mutual love.--Brahmanadhammika-sutta.

Let us now unite in the practice of what is good, cherishing a gentle
and sympathizing heart, and carefully cultivating good faith and
righteousness.--Travels of Fa-hien.

May I obtain wealth, and ... may the wealth ... obtained by me be for
the benefit of others.--Jinalankara.

Feeling deep compassion for the poor, grudging nothing which he
possessed.--Phu-yau-king.

Humble in mind, but large in gracious deeds, abundant in charity to
the poor and helpless.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Full of modesty and pity, ... kind and compassionate to all creatures
that have life.--Tevijja-sutta.

He who ... is tender to all that lives ... is protected by heaven and
loved by men.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

Day and night the mind of Buddha's disciples always delights in
compassion.--Dhammapada.

Let him not think detractingly of others.--Sariputta-sutta.

But offer loving thoughts and acts to all.--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Never should he speak a disparaging word of
anybody.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Whatever I understand (to be right) ... I desire to practice.--Rock
Inscriptions of Asoka.

Lightly to laugh at and ridicule another is wrong.--Fa-kheu-pi-us.

Virtuous deeds should be practiced today; for who can say but we may
die tomorrow?--Temee Jatu.

May I be thoroughly imbued with benevolence, and show always a
charitable disposition, till such time as this heart shall cease to
beat.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Born to give joy and bring peace to the world.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The whole world of sentient creatures enjoyed ... universal
tranquility.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Enmity and envy gave way to peace; contentment and rest prevailed
everywhere; ... discord and variance were entirely
appeased.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Creatures of every variety were moved one toward another lovingly;
fear and terror altogether put away, none entertained a hateful
thought; the Angels, foregoing their heavenly joys, sought rather to
alleviate the sinner's sufferings.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The virtuous retain in their mind the good done to them, whereas the
evil they experience drops from their mind, like water from a
lotus-petal.--Jatakamala.

Vice, O king, is a mean thing, virtue is great and grand.--Questions
of King Milinda.

I deem ... unrighteous actions contemptible.--Mahavagga.

Like food besmeared with poison, I abhor such happiness as is tainted
with unrighteousness.--Jatakamala.

As men sow, thus shall they reap.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Actions have their reward, and our deeds have their
result.--Mahavagga.

Our deeds are not lost, they will surely come (back
again).--Kokaliya-sutta.

Reaping the fruit of right or evil doing, and sharing happiness or
misery in consequence.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Your evil thoughts and evil words but hurt
yourself.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Hell was not created by any one.... The fire of the angry mind
produces the fire of hell, and consumes its possessor. When a person
does evil, he lights the fire of hell, and burns with his own
fire.--Mulamuli.

People grieve from selfishness.--Jara-sutta.

Doing good we reap good, just as a man who sows that which is sweet
(enjoys the same).--Fa-kheu-pi-us.

He who does wrong, O king, comes to feel remorse.... But he who does
well feels no remorse, and feeling no remorse, gladness will spring up
within him.--Questions of King Milinda.

Morality brings happiness: ... at night one's rest is peaceful, and on
waking one is still happy.--Udanavarga.

If, then, you would please me, show pity to that poor
wretch.--Nagananda.

Oppressed with others' sufferings.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

A loving heart is the great requirement! ... not to oppress, not to
destroy; ... not to exalt oneself by treading down others; but to
comfort and befriend those in suffering.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He cares for and cherishes his people more than one would a naked and
perishing child.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The acts and the practice of religion, to wit, sympathy, charity,
truthfulness, purity, gentleness, kindness.--Pillar Inscriptions of
Asoka.

Go ye, O Brethren, and wander forth, for the gain of the many, the
welfare of the many, in compassion for the world, for the good, for
the gain, for the welfare of ... men.... Publish, O, Brethren, the
doctrine glorious.... Preach ye a life of holiness ... perfect and
pure.--Mahavagga.

Go, then, through every country, convert those not converted.... Go,
therefore, each one travelling alone; filled with compassion, go!
rescue and receive.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Have you not heard what Buddha says in the Sutra (where he bids his
followers), not to despise the little child?--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

In this mode of salvation there are no distinctions of rich and poor,
male and female, people and priests: all are equally able to arrive at
the blissful state.--From a Chinese Buddhist Tract.

Even the most unworthy who seeks for salvation is not to be
forbidden.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Look with friendship ... on the evil and on the good.--Introduction to
Jataka Book.

Should those who are not with us, O Brethren, speak in dispraise of
me,[1] or of my doctrine, or of the church, that is no reason why you
should give way to anger.--Brahma-jala-sutta.

[Footnote 1: Buddha.]

Why should there be such sorrowful contention? You honor what we honor,
both alike: then we are brothers as concerns
religion.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

No decrying of other sects, ... no depreciation (of others) without
cause, but on the contrary, rendering of honor to other sects for
whatever cause honor is due. By so doing, both one's sect will be
helped forward, and other sects benefited; by acting otherwise, one's
own sect will be destroyed in injuring others.--Rock Inscriptions of
Asoka.

But if others walk not righteously, we ought by righteous dealing to
appease them: in this way, ... we cause religion everywhere to take
deep hold and abide.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Who is a (true) spiritual teacher?
He who, having grasped the essence of things, ever seeks to be of use
to other beings.

--Prasnottaramalika.

Tell him ... I look for no recompense--not even to be born in
heaven--but seek ... the benefit of men, to bring back those who have
gone astray, to enlighten those living in dismal error, to put away
all sources of sorrow and pain from the world.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

I consider the welfare of all people as something for which I must
work.--Rock Inscriptions of Asoka.

Then the man ... said to himself: "I will not keep all this treasure to
myself; I will share it with others." Upon this he went to king
Brahmadatta, and said: ... "Be it known to you I have discovered a
treasure, and I wish it to be used for the good of the
country."--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The sorrow of others enters into the hearts of good men as water into
the soil.--Story of Haritika.

With no selfish or partial joy ... they
rejoiced.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

If thou see others lamenting, join in their lamentations: if thou hear
others rejoicing, join in their joy.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

My son, tell me thy sorrow, that it may become more endurable by
participation.--Nagananda.

Every variety of living creature I must ever defend from
harm.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

To think no evil and do none: on the contrary, to benefit all
creatures.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Let the wise man guard his thoughts, for they are ... very artful and
rush wheresoever they list.--Dhammapada.

When thou seest righteousness, quickly follow it: when thou seest
iniquity, instantly flee.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

Like as the lotus is untarnished by the water, so is Nirvana by any
evil dispositions.--Questions of King Milinda.

May I never, even in a dream, be guilty of theft, adultery,
drunkenness, life-slaughter, and untruthfulness.--Attanagalu-vansa.

Spotless even as the moon, pure, serene, and
undisturbed.--Vasettha-sutta.

Practice the most perfect virtue.--Udanavarga.

To attain perfection that he may profit
others.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The present is an imperfect existence: ... I pray for greater
perfection in the next.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Fulfil the perfection of long-suffering; be thou patient under ...
reproach.--Introduction to Jataka Book.

My duty is to bear all the insults which the heretics launch against
me.--Buddhaghosa's Parables.

Silently shall I endure abuse, as the elephant in battle endures the
arrow sent from the bow.--Dhammapada.

Let not the member of Buddha's order tremble at blame, neither let him
puff himself up when praised.--Tuvataka-sutta.

The end of the pleasures of sense is as the lightning flash: ... what
profit, then, in doing iniquity?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Cultivate equanimity.--Nalaka-sutta.

Abhor dissimulation!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He speaks truth unmixed with falsehood.--Samanna-phala-sutta.

There is guilt (calling for repentance) in prevarication.--Patimokkha.

He that praises him who should be blamed, or blames him who should be
praised, gathers up sin thereby in his mouth.--Kokaliya-sutta.

The member of Buddha's order should abstain from theft, even of a
blade of grass.--Mahavagga.

From bribery, cheating, fraud, and (all other) crooked ways he
abstains.--Tevijja-sutta.

The Scripture moveth us, therefore, rather to cut off the hand than to
take anything which is not ours.--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

Let him not, even though irritated, speak harsh
words.--Sariputta-sutta.

From this day forth, ... although much be said against me, I will not
feel spiteful, angry, enraged, or morose, nor manifest anger and
hatred.--Anguttara-Nikaya.

Upright, conscientious and of soft speech, gentle and not
proud.--Metta-sutta.

    Even as the lily lives upon and loves the water,
    So Upatissa and Kolita likewise,
    Joined by closest bond of love,
    If by necessity compelled to live apart,
    Were overcome by grief and aching heart.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

(The true friend) forsakes you not in trouble; he will lay down his
life for your sake.--Sigalovada-sutta.

    In grief as well as in joy we are united,
    In sorrow and in happiness alike.
           *       *       *       *
    That which your heart rejoices in as good,
    That I also rejoice in and follow.
    It were better I should die with you,
    Than ... attempt to live where you are not.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

    When first I undertook to obtain wisdom,
    Then also I took on me to defend (the weak).
    All living things of whatsoever sort
    Call forth my compassion and pity.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Fault is not to be found unnecessarily--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Judge not thy neighbor.--Siamese Buddhist Maxim.

What is it to you ... whether another is guilty or guiltless? Come,
friend, atone for your own offense.--Mahavagga.

Even a king may be full of trouble; but a common man, who is holy, has
rest everlasting.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

This world is afflicted with death and decay; therefore the wise do
not grieve, knowing the terms of the world.--Salla-sutta.

Who that clings to Righteousness should be in fear of
death?--Jatakamala.

Ye, then, my followers, ... give not way ... to sorrow; ... aim to
reach the home where separation cannot come.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Loving and merciful towards all.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Filled with universal benevolence.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

A friend to all creatures in the world.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Bent on promoting the happiness of all created beings.--Lalita
Vistara.

Conquer thy greediness for sensual pleasures.--Jatukannimanavapuccha.

Therefore should we encourage small desire, that we may have to give
to him who needs.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Justly I seek for riches, and having sought for riches justly, I give
of my ... justly acquired wealth to one, to two, to three, ... to a
hundred.--Magha-sutta.

They sought their daily gain righteously; no covetous, money-loving
spirit prevailed; with pious intent they gave liberally; there was not
a thought of any reward.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

There is in charity a proper time and a proper
mode.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Better would it be to swallow a red-hot iron ball than that a bad,
unrestrained fellow should live on the charity of the land.--Dhammapada.

Our duty to do something, not only for our own benefit, but for the
good of those who shall come after us.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Have respect for the aged as though they were thy father and mother;
love the young as thy children or younger brethren.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

All the people were bound close in family love and
friendship.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Happy ... is the man that honors his father: he also that honors his
mother is happy.--Udanavarga.

How should I be capable of leaving thee in thy calamity?... Whatever
fate may be thine I am pleased with it.--Jatakamala.

He is my husband. I love and revere him with all my heart, and
therefore am determined to share his fate. Kill me first, ... and
afterwards do to him as you list.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

A heart bound by affection does not mind imminent peril. Worse than
death to such a one is the sorrow which the distress of a friend
inflicts.--Jatakamala.

This good man, moved by pity, gives up his life for another, as though
it were but a straw.--Nagananda.

Sprinkle water on the seeds of virtue.--Story of Pratiharyya.

The fool thinks himself alone and commits sin. But I know of no lonely
place at all.... Of a bad action my "Self" is a witness far more
sharp-sighted than any other person.--Jatakamala.

What has been designated "name" and "family" ... is but a
term.--Vasettha-sutta.

Reverence ... is due to righteous conduct.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The wise man ... regards with reverence all who deserve reverence,
without distinction of person.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

For if virtue flags and folly rules, what reverence can there be ...
for a high name or boast of prowess, inherited from former
generations?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Fools of little understanding have themselves for their greatest
enemies, for they do evil deeds which cannot but bear bitter
fruit.--Dhammapada.

There is not a spot upon earth, neither in the sky, neither in the
sea, neither ... in the mountain-clefts, where an (evil) deed does not
bring trouble (to the doer).--Udanavarga.

Surely if living creatures saw the consequence of all their evil
deeds, ... with hatred would they turn and leave them, fearing the
ruin following.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Exercising love towards the infirm.--Fa-kheu-pi-us.

Ever inspired by pity and love to men.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He lived for the good of mankind.--Jatakamala.

Whatsoever living beings there are, feeble or strong, small or large,
seen or not seen, may all creatures be happy-minded.--Metta-sutta.

Yield not (one moment) to the angry impulse.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Overcome anger by love.--Dhammapada.

A wise man never resents with passion the abuse of the
foolish--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

In agreement with all men, and hurting nobody, ... he, as far as
possible, does good to all.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

   Reverently practicing the four gracious acts--
   Benevolence, charity, humanity, love;
   Doing all for the good of men, and that they in turn may benefit others.

--Phu-yau-king.

   They also,[2] resigning the deathless bliss within their reach,
   Worked the welfare of mankind in various lands.
   What man is there who would be remiss in doing good to mankind?

--Quoted by Max Muller.

[Footnote 2: Buddhist missionaries.]

He identified himself with all beings--Jatakamala.

    Because the dove fears the hawk,
    With fluttering pennons she comes to seek my protection.
    Though she cannot speak with her mouth,
    Yet through fear her eyes are moist.
    Now, therefore, I will extend (to this poor creature)
    My own protection and defense.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

How indifferent he was to his own welfare!...

How intolerant of the suffering of others!--Jatakamala. In every
condition, high or low, we find folly and ignorance (and men), carelessly
following the dictates of ... passion.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Neither is it right to judge men's character by outward
appearances.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

The body may wear the ascetic's garb, the heart be immersed in worldly
thoughts: ... the body may wear a worldly guise, the heart mount high
to things celestial.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Full of truth and compassion and mercy and long-suffering.--Jataka.

Uprightness is his delight.--Tevijja-sutta.

Making ... virtue always his first aim.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

An example for all the earth.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

What he hears he repeats not there, to raise a quarrel against the
people here.--Tevijja-sutta.

He injures none by his conversation.--Samanna-phala-sutta.

Walk in the path of duty, do good to your brethren, and work no evil
towards them.--Avadana Sataka.

Aiming to curb the tongue, ... aiming to benefit the
world.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Intent upon benefiting your fellow-creatures.--Katha Sarit Sagara.

Health is the greatest of gifts, contentment the best of
riches.--Dhammapada.

If thou be born in the poor man's hovel, yet have wisdom, then wilt
thou be like the lotus-flower growing out of the mire.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

He that is rich but is not contented endures the pain of
poverty.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The words of Buddha, even when stern, yet ... as full of pity as the
words of a father to his children.--Questions of King Milinda.

Overcoming all enemies by the force (of his
love).--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

How great his pity and his love toward those who opposed his claims,
neither rejoicing in their defeat, nor yet exulting in his own
success!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The Buddha has mercy even on the meanest thing.--Cullavagga.

He that ... would wait upon me,[3] let him wait on the
sick.--Mahavagga.

[Footnote 3: Buddha.]

The Buddha, O king, magnifies not the offering of gifts to himself,
but rather to whosoever ... is deserving.--Questions of King Milinda.

If you desire to honor Buddha, follow the example of his patience and
long-suffering.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

    Radiant with heavenly pity, lost in care
    For those he knew not, save as fellow-lives.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Who that hears of him, but yearns with love?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.