         Our age is essentially one of understanding and reflection, without
passion, momentarily bursting into enthusiasm, and shrewdly relapsing into
repose.

          If we had statistical tables of the consumption of intelligence from
generation to generation as we have for spirits, we should be astounded at the
enormous amount of scruple and deliberation consumed by small, well-to-do
families living quietly, and at the amount which the young, and even children,
use. For just as the children’s crusade may be said to typify the Middle Ages,
precocious children are typical of the present age. In fact one is tempted to
ask whether there is a single man left ready, for once, to commit an
outrageous folly.

          Nowadays not even a suicide kills himself in desperation. Before
taking the step he deliberates so long and so care fully that he literally chokes
with thought. It is even questionable whether he ought to be called a suicide,
since it is really thought which takes his life. He does not die with deliberation
but from deliberation.

         It would therefore be very difficult to prosecute the present
generation in view of its legal quibbles: in fact, its ability, virtuosity and good
sense consists in trying to reach a judgement and a decision without ever
going as far as action. If one may say of the revolutionary period that it runs
wild, one would have to say of the present that it runs badly. Between them,
the individual and his generation always bring each other to a standstill, with
the result that the prosecuting attorney would find it next to impossible to get
any fact admitted—because nothing really happens. To judge from
innumerable indications, one would conclude that something quite exceptional
had either just happened or was just about to happen. Yet any such conclusion
would be quite wrong. Indications are, indeed, the only achievements of the
age; and its skill and inventiveness in constructing fascinating illusions, its
bursts of enthusiasm, using as a deceitful escape some projected change of
form, must be rated as high in the scale of cleverness and of the negative use
of strength as the passionate, creative energy of the revolution in the
corresponding scale of energy. But the present generation, wearied by its
chimerical efforts, relapses into complete indolence. Its condition is that of a
man who has only fallen asleep towards morning: first of all come great
dreams, then a feeling of laziness, and finally a witty or clever excuse for
remaining in bed.

        However well-meaning and strong the individual man may be (if he
could only use his strength), he still has not the passion to be able to tear
himself from the coils and seductive uncertainty of reflection. Nor do his
surroundings supply the events or produce the general enthusiasm necessary
in order to free him. Instead of coming to his help, his milieu forms around him
a negative intellectual opposition, which juggles for a moment with a
deceptive prospect, only to deceive him in the end by pointing to a brilliant
way out of the difficulty — by showing him that the shrewdest thing of all is to
do nothing. For at the bottom of the tergiversation of the present age is vis
inertiae, and every one without passion congratulates himself upon being the
first to discover it, and so becomes cleverer still. During the revolution arms
were distributed freely, just as during the Crusades the insignia of the exploit
were bestowed upon men, but nowadays people are supplied with rules of
careful conduct and ready reckoners to facilitate judgement. If a generation
were given the diplomatic task of postponing any action in such a way as to
make it seem as if something were just about to happen, then we should have
to admit that our age had performed as remarkable a feat as the revolutionary
age. Let any one try forgetting all he knows of the age and its actual relativity
which is so enhanced by familiarity, and then arrive, as it were, from another
world: if he were then to read a book or an article in the papers, or merely to
speak to some passer-by, his impression would be: ‘Good heavens, something
is going to happen to-night — or perhaps something happened the night
before last.’

          A revolutionary age is an age of action; ours is the age of
advertisement and publicity. Nothing ever happens but there is immediate
publicity everywhere. In the present age a rebellion is, of all things, the most
unthinkable. Such an expression of strength would seem ridiculous to the
calculating intelligence of our times. On the other hand a political virtuoso
might bring off a feat almost as remarkable. He might write a manifesto
suggesting a general assembly at which people should decide upon a
rebellion, and it would be so carefully worded that even the censor would let it
pass. At the meeting itself he would be able to create the impression that his
audience had rebelled, after which they would all go quietly home — having
spent a very pleasant evening. Among the young men of today a profound and
prodigious learning is almost unthinkable; they would find it ridiculous On the
other hand a scientific virtuoso might draw up a subscription form outlining an
all embracing system which he purposed to write and, what is more, in such a
way that the reader would feel he had already read the system; for the age of
encyclopaedists, when men wrote gigantic folios with unremitting pains, is
gone. Now is the turn of those light-weight encyclopaedists who, en passant,
deal with all the sciences and the whole of existence. Equally unthinkable
among the young men of today is a truly religious renunciation of the world,
adhered to with daily self-denial. On the other hand almost any theological
student is capable of something far more wonderful He could found a society
with the sole object of saving all those who are lost. The age of great and good
actions is past, the present is the age of anticipation when even recognition is
received in advance. No one is satisfied with doing something definite, every
one wants to feel flattered by reflection with the illusion of having discovered
at the very least a new continent. Like a young man who decides to work for
his examination in all earnest from September 1st, and in order to strengthen
his resolution decides to take a holiday during August, so the present
generation seems — though this is decidedly more difficult to understand — to
have made a solemn resolution that the next generation should set to work
seriously, and in order to avoid disturbing or delaying the next generation, the
present attends to — the banquets. Only there is a difference: the young man
understands himself in the light-heartedness of youth, whereas our generation
is serious — even at banquets.

          There is no more action or decision in our day than there is perilous
delight in swimming in shallow waters. But just as a grown-up, struggling
delightedly in the waves, calls to those younger than himself: ‘Come on, jump
in quickly ‘— the decision in existence, so to speak (of course it is in the
individual) calls out to the young who are not as yet worn out by over
reflective thought or overburdened by the illusions of reflective thought: Come
on, leap cheerfully, even if it means a lighthearted leap, so long as it is
decisive. If you are capable of being a man, then danger and the harsh
judgement of existence on your thoughtlessness will help you to become one.

           If the jewel which every one desired to possess lay far out on a frozen
lake where the ice was very thin, watched over by the danger of death, while,
closer in, the ice was perfectly safe, then in a passionate age the crowds
would applaud the courage of the man who ventured out, they would tremble
for him and with him in the danger of his decisive action, they would grieve
over him if he were drowned, they would make a god of him if he secured the
prize. But in an age without passion, in a reflective age, it would be otherwise.
People would think each other clever in agreeing that it was Unreasonable and
not even worth while to venture so far out. And in this way they would
transform daring and enthusiasm into a feat of skill, so as to do something, for
after all ‘something must be done.’ The crowds would go out to watch from a
safe place, and with the eyes of connoisseurs appraise the accomplished
skater who could skate almost to the very edge (i.e. as far as the ice was still
safe and the danger have not yet begun) and then turn back. The most
accomplished skater would manage to go out to the furthermost point and
then perform a still more dangerous looking run, so as to make the spectators
hold their breath and say: ‘Ye Gods! How mad; he is risking his life.’ But look,
and you will see that his skill was so astonishing that he managed to turn back
just in time, while the ice was perfectly safe and there was still no danger. As
at the theatre, the crowd would applaud and acclaim him, surge homeward
with the heroic artist in their midst, to honour him with a magnificent banquet.
For intelligence has got the upper hand to such an extent that it transforms
the real task into an unreal trick and reality into a play. During the banquet
admiration would reach its height. Now the proper relation between the
admirer and the object of admiration is one in which the admirer is edified by
the thought that he is a man like the hero, humbled by the thought that he is
incapable of such great actions, yet morally encouraged to emulate him
according to his powers; but where intelligence has got the upper hand the
character of admiration is completely altered. Even at the height of the
banquet, when the applause was loudest, the admiring guests would all have
a shrewd notion that the action of the man who received all the honour was
not really so extraordinary, and that only by chance was the gathering for him,
since after all, with a little practice, every one could have done as much.
Briefly, instead of being strengthened in their discernment and encouraged to
do good, the guests would more probably go home with an even stronger
predisposition to the most dangerous, if also the most respectable, of all
diseases: to admire in public what is considered unimportant in private—since
everything is made into a joke. And so, stimulated by a gush of admiration,
they are all comfortably agreed that they might just as well admire
themselves.

          Formerly it was agreed that a man stood or fell by his actions;
nowadays, on the contrary, every one idles about and comes off brilliantly with
the help of a little reflection, knowing perfectly well what ought to be done.
But what two people talking together, or the speakers at a meeting,
understand perfectly presented to them as a thought or as an observation,
they cannot understand at all in the form of action. If-same one were to
overhear what people said ought to be done, and then in a spirit of irony, and
for no other reason, proceeded to act accordingly every one would be amazed.
They would find it rash, yet as soon as they had talked it over they would find
that it was just what should be done.

           The present age with its sudden enthusiasms followed by apathy and
indolence is very near the comic; but those who understand the comic see
quite clearly that the comic is not where the present age imagines. Now satire,
if it is to do a little good and not cause immeasurable harm, must be firmly
based upon a consistent ethical view of life, a natural distinction which
renounces the success of the moment; otherwise the cure will be infinitely
worse than the disease. The really comic thing is that an age such as this
should try to be witty and humorous; for that is most certainly the last and
most acrobatic way out of the impasse. What, indeed, is there for an age of
reflection and thought to defy with humour? For, being without passion, it has
lost all feeling for the values of eros, for enthusiasm and sincerity in politics
and religion, or for piety, admiration and domesticity in everyday life. But even
if the vulgar laugh, life only mocks at the wit which knows no values. To be
witty without possessing the riches of inwardness is like squandering money
upon luxuries and dispensing with necessities, or, as the proverb says, like
selling one’s breeches to buy a wig. But an age without passion has no values,
and everything is transformed into representational ideas. Thus there are
certain remarks and expressions current which, though true and reasonable up
to a point, are lifeless. On the other hand no hero, no lover, no thinker, no
knight of the faith, no proud man, no man in despair would claim to have
experienced them completely and personally. And just as one longs for the
clink of real money after the crackle of bank-notes, one longs nowadays for a
little originality. Yet what is more spontaneous than wit? It is more
spontaneous, at least more surprising, even than the first bud of spring and
the first tender shoots of grain. Why, even if spring carne according to
agreement it would still be spring, but wit upon agreement would be
disgusting.

        But, now, supposing that as a relief from feverish and sudden
enthusiasms things went so far that wit, that divine accident—an additional
favour which comes as a sign from the gods, from the mysterious source of
the inexplicable, so that not even the wittiest of men dares to say: to-morrow,
but adoringly says: when it pleases the gods—but supposing that wit were to
be transformed into its shabbiest contrary, a trivial necessity, so that it
became a profitable branch of trade to manufacture and make up and remake,
and buy up old and new witticisms — what an epigram on a witty age!

         In the end, therefore, money will be the one thing people will desire,
which is moreover only representative, an abstraction. Nowadays a young man
hardly envies anyone his gifts, his art, the love of a beautiful girl, or his fame;
he only envies him his money. Give me money, he will say, and I am saved.
But the young man will not run riot, he will not deserve what repentance
repays. He would die with nothing to reproach himself with, and under the
impression that if only he had had the money he might really have lived and
might even have achieved something great.

          After these general observations, and having compared the present
age with the revolutionary age, it will be in order to go back to the dialectical
and categorical definitions of the present age, regardless whether they are
present at a given moment or not. We are concerned here with the ‘how’ of
the age, and this how’ must be defined from a universal standpoint, the final
consequences of which can be reached by deduction, a posse ad esse, and
verified by observation and experience ab esse ad posse.

          As far as its significance is concerned it is, of course, possible that the
work of reflection, which is the task before the present age, may ultimately be
explained in a higher form of existence. As for its quality, there is no doubt
that the individual resting in his reflection can be just as well-intentioned as a
passionate man who has made his decision; and conversely there may be just
as much excuse for the man whose passions run away with him as for a man
whose fault is never apparent, though he is cleverly aware that he lets himself
be deceived by bis reflection. The results of reflection are both dangerous and
unforeseeable because one can never tell whether the decision which saves a
man from evil is reached after thorough consideration, or whether it is simply
the exhaustion resulting from reflection which prevents him from doing wrong.
One thing, however, is certain, an increased power of reflection like an
increased knowledge only adds to man’s affliction, and above all it is certain
that for the individual as for the generation no task is more difficult than to
escape from the temptations of reflection, simply because they are so
dialectical and the result of one clever discovery may give the whole question
a new turn, because at any moment reflection is capable of explaining
everything quite differently and allowing one some way of escape; because at
the last moment of a reflective decision reflection is capable of changing
everything — after one has made far greater exertions than are necessary to
get a man of character into the midst of things.

          But these are only the excuses of reflection and the real position in
reflection remains unchanged, for it is only altered within reflection. Even if a
certain injustice is done to the present age when it is compared to a complete
and closed period (the present age is still struggling with all the difficulties of
‘becoming’, such a qualification is only a reflective qualification; and then, in
return, its uncertainty is filled with hope.

           A passionate tumultuous age will overthrow everything, pull
everything down; but a revolutionary age, that is at the same time reflective
and passionless, transforms that expression of strength into a feat of
dialectics: it leaves everything standing but cunningly empties it of
significance. Instead of culminating in a rebellion it reduces the inward reality
of all relationships to a reflective tension which leaves everything standing but
makes the whole of life ambiguous: so that everything continues to exist
factually whilst by a dialectical deceit, privatissime, it supplies a secret
interpretation — that it does not exist.

          Morality is character, character is that which is engraved ();
but the sand and the sea have no character and neither has abstract
intelligence, for character is reality inwardness. Immorality, as energy, is also
character; but to be neither moral nor immoral is merely ambiguous, and
ambiguity enters into life when the qualitative distinctions are weakened by a
gnawing reflection. The revolt of the passions is elemental, the dissolution
brought about by ambiguity is a silent sorites 1 that goes on night and day. The
distinction between good and evil is enervated by a superficial, superior and
theoretical knowledge of evil, and by a supercilious cleverness which is aware
that goodness is neither appreciated nor worth while in this world, that it is
tantamount to stupidity. No one is any longer carried away by the desire for
the good to perform great things, no one is precipitated by evil into atrocious
sins, and so there is nothing for either the good or the bad to talk about, and
yet for that very reason people gossip all the more, since ambiguity is
tremendously stimulating and much more verbose than rejoicing over
goodness or repentance over evil.

          The springs of life, which are only what they are because of the
qualitative differentiating power of passion, lose their elasticity. The distance
separating a thing from its opposite in quality no longer regulates the inward
relation of things. Ali inwardness is lost, and to that extent the relation no
longer exists, or else forms a colourless cohesion. The negative law is this:
opposites are unable to dispense with each other and unable to hold together.
The positive law is that they are able to dispense with each other and are able
to hold together or, stated positively: opposites are unable to dispense with
each other because of the connexion between them. But when the inward
relation is wanting another takes its place: a quality is no longer related to its
contrary; instead, the partners both stand and observe each other and the
state of tension thus produced is really the end of the relationship. For
example, the admirer no longer cheerfully and happily acknowledges
greatness, promptly expressing his appreciation, and then rebelling against its
pride and arrogance. Nor is the relationship in any sense the opposite. The
admirer and the object of admiration stand like two polite equals, and observe
each other. A subject no longer freely honours his king or is angered at his
ambition. To be a subject has come to mean something quite different; it
means to be a third party. The subject ceases to have a position within the
relationship; he has no direct relation to the king but simply becomes an
observer and deliberately works out the problem; i.e. the relation of a subject
to his king. For a time committee after committee is formed, so long, that is to
say, as there are still people who passionately want to be what they ought to
be; but in the end the whole age becomes a committee. A father no longer
curses his son in anger, using all his parental authority, nor does a son defy his
father, a conflict which might end in the inwardness of forgiveness; on the
contrary, their relationship is irreproachable, for it is really in process of
ceasing to exist, since they are no longer related to one another within the
relationship; in fact it has become a problem in which the two partners
observe each other as in a game, instead of having any relation to each other,
and they note down each other’s remarks instead of showing a firm devotion.
More and more people renounce the quiet and modest tasks of life, that are so
important and pleasing to God, in order to achieve something greater; in order
to think over the relationships of life in a higher relationship till in the end the
whole generation has become a representation, who represent... it is difficult
to say who; and who think about these relationships for whose sake it is not
easy to discover. A disobedient youth is no longer in fear of his schoolmaster
— the relation is rather one of indifference in which schoolmaster and pupil
discuss how a good school should be run. To go to school no longer means to
be in fear of the master, or merely to learn, but rather implies being interested
in the problem of education. Again the differentiating relation of man to
woman is never broken in an audaciously licentious manner; decency is
observed in such a way that one can only describe these innocent borderline
flirtations as trivial.

          What in fact should one call such relationships? A tension, 1 think, is
the best description, not, however, a tension which strains the forces to
breaking-point, but rather a tension which exhausts life itself and the fire of
that enthusiasm and inwardness which makes the fetters of dependance and
the crown of dominion light, which makes the child’s obedience and the
father’s authority joyful, the admiration of the subject and the exaltation of the
great fearless, which gives recognized importance to the master and thus to
the disciple occasion to learn, which unites woman’s weakness and man’s
strength in the equal strength of devotion. As it is the relationships still exist
but they lack the force which makes it possible for them to draw together in
inwardness and unite in harrnony. lhe relationship expresses its presence and
its absence sirnultaneously, not completely but rather as though it were
drawled out, half-awake and uninterruptedly.

          Perhaps I can explain what I mean by a very simple illustration? I
once knew a family who owned a grandfather clock whose works for some
reason or other had got out of order. But the fault did not result in the spring
suddenly unwinding, or in the chain breaking or in the hand ceasing to strike;
on the contrary, it went on striking in a curiously abstract, though confusing,
way. lt did not strike twelve times at twelve o’clock and once at one o’clock,
but struck once ali through the day at regular intervais. It went on striking ali
day long but never gave a definite time.

         The same applies to a state of exhausted tension: the relationship
continues; something is expressed with an abstract continuity which prevents
any real break, but although it must nevertheless be described as an
expression of the relationship, the relationship is not only ambiguously
expressed, it is almost meaningless.

          It is this deceptive lull in the relationship which continues the relation
as a fact; the danger is that it favours the cunning deprivations of reflection.
Against a rebellion one can use force, and an obvious counterfeit has only to
wait for its punishment; but dialecticai complications are difficult to root out,
and it requires even better ears to track down the stealthy movement of
reflection along its secret and ambiguous path.

          The established order of things continues to exist, but it is its
ambiguity which satisfies our reflective and passionless age. No one, for
example, wishes to do away with the power of the king, but if little by little it
could be transformed into something purely fictitious every one would be quite
prepared to cheer him. No one, for example, wishes to bring about the
downfall of the eminent, but if distinction could be shown to be purely
fictitious then every one would be prepared to admire it. In the sarne way
people are quite prepared to leave the Christian terminology untouched, but
they can surreptitiously interpolate that it involves no decisive thought. And so
they remain unrepentant, for after all they have destroyed nothing. They no
more desire a powerful king than an heroic liberator or religious authority. In
all innocence they want the established order to continue, but they have the
more or iess certain reflective knowledge that it no longer exists. lhen they
proudly imagine that their attitude is ironical—as though real irony were not
essentially a concealed enthusiasm in a negative age (just as the hero is
enthusiasm made manifest in a positive age), as though irony did not involve
sacrifice, when its greatest master was put to death.

          This reflective tension ultimately constitutes itself into a principie,
and just as in a passionate age enthusiasm is the unifying principie, so in an
age which is very reflective and passionless envy is the negative unifying
principie. This must not, however, be interpreted as an ethical charge; the idea
of reflection is, if one may so express it, envy, and it is therefore twofold in its
action: it is selfish within the individual and it results in the selfishness of the
society around him, which thus works against him.

          The envy in reflection (within the individual) prevents him making a
decision passionately. If, for a moment, it should seem as though an individual
were about to succeed in throwing off the yoke of reflection, he is at once
pulled up by the opposition of the reflection which surrounds him. The envy
which springs from reflection imprisons man’s will and his strength. First of all
the individual has to break loose from the bonds of his own reflection, but
even then he is not free. Instead he finds himself in the vast prison formed by
the reflection of those around him, for because of his relation to his own
reflection he also has a certain relation to the reflection around him. He can
only escape from this second imprisonment through the inwardness of
religion, no matter how clearly he may perceive the falseness of the situation.
With every means in its power reflection prevents people from realizing that
both the individual and the age are thus imprisoned, not imprisoned by tyrants
or priests or nobles or the secret police, but by reflection itself, and it does so
by maintaining the flattering and conceited notion that the possibility of
reflection is far superior to a mere decision. A selfish envy makes such
demands upon the individual that by asking too much it prevents him from
doing anything. It spoils him like an indulgent mother, for the envy within him
prevents the individual from devoting himself to others. Moreover, the envy
which surrounds him and in which he participates by envying others, is
envious in a negative and critical sense.

           But the further it is carried the more clearly does the envy of
reflection become a moral ressentiment. Just as air in a sealed space becomes
poisonous, so the imprisonment of reflection develops a culpable ressentiment
if it is not ventilated by action or incident of any kind. In reflection the state of
strain (or tension as we called it) results in the neutralization of all the higher
powers, and ali that is low and despicable comes to the fore, its very
impudence giving the spurious effect of strength, while protected by its very
baseness it avoids attracting the attention of ressentiment.

          It is a fundamental truth of human nature that man is incapable of
remaining permanently on the heights, of continuing to admire anything.
Human nature needs variety. Even in the most enthusiastic ages people have
always liked to joke enviously about their superiors. That is perfectly in order
and is entirely justiflable so long as after having laughed at the great they can
once more iook upon them with admiration; otherwise the game is not worth
the candle. In that way ressentiment finds an outlet even in an enthusiastic
age. And as long as an age, even though less enthusiastic, has the strength to
give ressentiment its proper character and has made up its mmd what its
expression signifles, ressentiment has its own, though dangerous, importance.
In Greece, for example, the form ressentiment took was ostracism, a self
defensive effort, as it were, on the part of the masses to preserve their
equilibrium in face of the outstanding qualities of the eminent. The
outstanding man was exiled, but every one understood how diaiectical the
relationship was, ostracism being a mark of distinction. Thus, in representing a
somewhat earlier period in the spirit of Aristophanes, it would be more ironical
to let a completely unimportant person be ostracized than to let him become
dictator, because ostracism is the negative mark of greatness. But it would be
stiil better to let the story end with the peopie recalling the man whom they
had ostracized because they could no longer do without him, and he wouid
then be a complete mystery to the country of his exile, which wouid, of course,
be quite unable to discover anything remarkabie about him. In The Knights
Aristophanes gives us a picture of the final state of corruption in which the
vulgar rabble ends when — just as in Tibet they worship the Dalai Lama’s
excrement — they contemplate their own scum in its representatives; and
that, in a democracy, is a degree of corruption comparable to auctioning the
crown in a monarchy. But as long as ressentiment still has any character,
ostracism is a negative mark of distinction. The man who told Aristides that he
had voted for his exile ‘because he could not endure hearing Aristides called
the only just man’ did not deny Aristides’ eminence, but admitted something
about himself. He admitted that his relation to distinction was the unhappy
love of envy, instead of the happy love of admiration, but he did not try to
belittle that distinction.

          On the other side, the more reflection gets the upper hand and thus
makes people indolent, the more dangerous ressentiment becomes, because it
no longer has sufficient character to make it conscious of its significance.
Bereft of that character reflection is cowardly and vacillating, and according to
circumstances interprets the sarne thing in a variety of ways. It tries to treat it
as a joke, and if that falls, to regard it as an insult, and when that falls, to
dismiss it as nothing at all; or else it will treat the thing as a witticism, and if
that falls then say that it was meant as a moral satire deserving attention, and
if that does not succeed, add that it is not worth bothering about.

          Thus ressentiment becomes the constituent principle of want of
character, which from utter wretchedness tries to sneak itself a position, all
the time safeguarding itself by conceding that it is less than nothing. The
ressentiment which results from want of character can never understand that
eminent distinction really is distinction. Neither does it understand itself by
recognizing distinction negatively (as in the case of ostracism) but wants to
drag it down, wants to belittle it so that it really ceases to be distinguished.
And ressentiment not only defends itseif against ali existing forms of
distinction but against that which is stiil to come.

          The ressentiment which is establishing itself is the process of
levelling, and while a passionate age storms ahead setting up new things and
tearing down old, raising and demolishing as it goes, a reflective and
passionless age does exactly the contrary: it hinders and stifles all action; it
levels. Leveliing is a siient, mathematicai, and abstract occupation which
shuns upheavals. In a burst of momentary enthusiasm people might, in their
despondency, even long for a misfortune in order to feel the powers of life, but
the apathy which follows is no more helped by a disturbance than an engineer
levelling a piece of land. At its most violent a rebellion is like a volcanic
eruption and drowns every other sound. At its maximum the levelling process
is a deathly silence in which one can hear one’s heart beat, a science which
nothing can pierce, in which everything is engulfed, powerless to resist. One
man can be at the head of a rebellion, but no one can be at the head of the
levelling process alone, for in that case he would be the leader and would thus
escape being levelled. Each individual within his own little circle can cooperate
in the levelling, but it is an abstract power, and the levelling process is the
victory of abstraction over the individual. The levelling process in modern
times, corresponds, in reflection, to fate in antiquity.

         The dialectic of antiquity tended towards leadership (the great
individual and the masses — the free man and the slaves); so far the dialectic
of Christendom tends towards representation (the majority sees itself in its
representative and is set free by the consciousness that it is the majority
which it represented, in a sort of selfconsciousness); the dialectic of the
present age tends towards equality, and its most logical — though mistaken —
fulfillment is levelling, as the negative unity of the negative reciprocity of all
individuals.

          It must be obvious to every one that the profound significance of the
levelling process lies in the fact that it means the predominance of the
category ‘generation’ over the category ‘individuality’. In antiquity the total
number of the individuals was there to express, as it were, the value of the
outstanding individual. Nowadays the standard of value has been changed so
that equally, approximately so and so many men go to one individual, and one
need only be sure of having the right number in order to have importance. In
antiquity the individual in the masses had no importance whatsoever; the
outstanding individual signified them all. The present age tends towards a
mathematical equality in which equally in all classes approximately so and so
many people go to one individual. Formerly the outstanding individual could
allow himself everything and the individual in the masses nothing at ali. Now
everyone knows that so and so many make an individual and quite
consistently peopie add themselves together (it is called joining together, but
that is only a polite euphemism) for the most trivial purposes. Simply in order
to put a passing whim into practice a few people add themselves together,
and the thing is done — then they dare do it. For that reason not even a
preeminently gifted man can free himself from reflection, because he very
soon becomes conscious of himself as a fractional part in some quite trivial
matter, and so fails to achieve the infinite freedom of religion. The fact that
several peopie united together have the courage to meet death does not
nowadays mean that each, individually, has the courage, for, even more than
death, the individual fears the judgement and protest of reflection upon his
wishing to risk something on his own. The individual no longer belongs to God,
to himself, to his beloved, to his art or to his science, he is conscious of
belonging in all things to an abstraction to which he is subjected by reflection,
just as a self belongs to an estate. That is why people band together in cases
where it is an absolute contradiction to be more than one. The apotheosis of
the positive principle of association is nowadays the devouring and
demoralizing principle which in the slavery of reflection makes even virtues
into vitia splendida. There is no other reason for this than that eternal
responsibility, and the religious singling out of the individual before God, is
ignored. When corruption sets in at that point people seek consolation in
company, and so reflection catches the individual for life. And those who do
not realize even the beginning of this crisis are engulfed without further ado in
the reflective relationship.

          The levelling process is not the action of an individual but the work of
reflection in the hands of an abstract power. It is therefore possible to
calculate the law governing it in the same way that one calculates the
diagonal in a parallelogram of forces. The individual who levels down is himself
engulfed in the process and so on, and while he seems to know selfishly what
he is doing one can only say of people en masse that they know not what they
do; for just as collective enthusiasm produces a surplus which does not come
from the individual, there is also a surplus in this case. A demon is called up
over whom no individual has any power, and though the very abstraction of
levelling gives the individual a momentary, selfish kind of enjoyment, he is at
the same time signing the warrant for his own doom. Enthusiasm may end in
disaster, but levelling is eo ipso the destruction of the individual. No age, and
therefore riot the present age, can bring the scepticism of that process to a
halt, for as soon as it tries to stop it, the law of the levelling process is again
called into action. It can therefore only be held up by the individual attaining
the religious courage which springs from his individual religious isolation.

          I was once the witness of a street flight in which three men most
shamefully set upon a fourth. The crowd stood and watched them with
indignation; expressions of disgust began to enliven the scene; then several of
the onlookers set on one of the three assailants and knocked him down and
beat him. The avengers had, in fact, applied precisely the same rules as the
offenders. If I may be allowed to do so, I will introduce my own unimportant
self into the story and continue. I went up to one of the avengers and tried by
argument to explain to him how illogical his behaviour was; but it seemed
quite impossible for him to discuss the question: he could only repeat that
such a rascal richly deserved to have three people against him. The humour of
the situation would have been even more apparent to some one who had not
seen the beginning of the brawl, and so simply heard one man saying of
another (who was alone) that he was three against one, and heard the remark
just when the very reverse was the case — when they were three to one
against him. In the first place it was humorous because of the contradiction
which it involved, as when the policeman told a man standing in the street’ to
kindly disperse’. Secondly it had all the humour of self contradiction. But what
I learnt from it was that I had better give up all hope of putting a stop to that
scepticism, lest it should turn upon me.

          No single individual (I mean no outstanding individual — in the sense
of leadership and conceived according to the dialectical category ‘fate’) will be
able to arrest the abstract process of levelling, for it is negatively something
higher, and the age of chivalry is gone. No society or association can arrest
that abstract power, simply because an association h itself in the service of
the levelling process. Not even the individuality of the different nationalities
can arrest it, for on a higher plane the abstract process of levelling is a
negative representation of humanity pure and unalloyed. The abstract
levelling process, that self-combustion of the human race, produced by the
friction which arises when the individual ceases to exist as singled out by
religion, is bound to continue, like a trade wind, and consume everything. But
through it each individual for himself may receive once more a religious
education and, in the highest sense, will be helped by the examen rigorosum
of the levelling process to an essentially religious attitude. For the younger
men who, however strongly they personality may cling to what they admire as
eminent, realize from the beginning that the levelling process is evil in both
the selfish individual and in the selfish generation, but that it can also, if they
desire it honestly and before God, become the starting point for the highest
life — for them it will indeed be an education to live in the age of levelling.
Their age will, in the very highest sense, develop them religiously and at the
same time educate them aesthetically and intellectually, because in this way
the comic will receive its absolute expression. The highest form of the comic
arises precisely when the individual comes directly under the infinite
abstraction of ‘pure humanity’, without any of those intermediary
qualifications which temper the humour of man’s position and strengthen its
pathos, without any of the concrete particulars of organization which the
levelling process destroys. But that again is only another expression of the fact
that man’s only salvation lies in the reality of religion for each individual.

         And it will add fuel to their enthusiasm to understand that it is in fact
through error that the individual is given access to the highest, if he
courageously desires it. But the levelling process will have to continue, and
must be completed, just as the scandal had to come into the world, though
woe to them by whom it comes.

          It has often been said that a reformation should begin with each man
reforming himself. That, however, is not what actually happened, for the
reformation produced a hero who paid God dearly enough for his position as
hero. By joining up with him directly people buy cheap, indeed at bargain
prices, what he had paid for so dearly; but they do not buy the highest of all
things. The abstract principle of levelling, on the contrary, like the biting east
wind, has no personal relation to any individual but has only an abstract
relationship which is the same for every one. There, no hero suffers for others,
or helps them; the taskmaster of all alike is the levelling process which itself
takes on their education. And the man who learns most from the levelling and
himself becomes greatest does not become an outstanding man or a hero —
that would only impede the levelling process, which is rigidity consistent to the
end — he himself prevents that from happening because he has understood
the meaning of levelling; he becomes a man and nothing else, in the complete
equalitarian sense. That is the idea of religion. But, under those conditions, the
equalitarian order is severe and the profit is seemingly very small; seemingly,
for unless the individual learns in the reality of religion and before God to be
content with himself, and learns, instead of dominating others, to dominate
himself, content as priest to be his own audience, and as author his own
reader, if he will not learn to be satisfied with that as the highest, because it is
the expression of the equality of all men before God and of our likeness to
others, then he will not escape from reflection. It may be that for one
deceptive moment it will seem to him, in relation to his gifts, as though he
were levelling, but in the end he will sink down beneath the levelling process.
There is no good calling upon a Holger Danske or a Martin Luther; their day is
over and at bottom it is only the individual’s laziness which makes a man long
to have them back, a worldly impatience which prefers to buy something
cheap, second-hand, rather than to buy the highest of all things very dear and
first-hand. It is worse than useless to found society after society, because
negatively speaking there is something above them, even though the short-
sighted member of the society cannot see it.

         The principle of individuality in its immediate and beautiful formation
is symbolized for the generation in the outstanding and eminent individual; it
groups subordinate individualities round the representative. This principle of
individuality, in its eternal truth, uses the abstraction and equality of the
generation to level down, and in that way co-operates in developing the
individual religiously into a real man. For the levelling process is as powerful
where temporary things are concerned as it is impotent where eternal things
are concerned. Reflection is a snare in which one is caught, but, once the
‘leap’ of enthusiasm has been taken, the relation is a different one and it
becomes a noose which drags one into eternity. Reflection is and remains the
hardest creditor in existence; hitherto it has cunningly bought up all the
possible views of life, but it cannot buy the essentially religious and eternal
view of life; on the other hand, it can tempt people astray with its dazzling
brilliance, and dishearten them by reminding them of all the past. But, by
leaping into the depths, one learns to help oneself, learns to love others as
much as oneself, even though one is accused of arrogance and pride —
because one will not accept help — or of selfishness, because one will not
cunningly deceive people by helping them, i.e. by helping them to escape
their highest destiny.

         Should any one complain that what 1 have set forth here is known to
all and could be said by any one, then my answer is: the more the merrier — I
am not asking for a position of eminence and I have nothing against every one
knowing my opinion, unless that were to mean, in a sense, that it is to be
taken from me and thereby put at the disposal of a negative association. So
long as I have permission to retain them, my opinions do not lose their value
by being known to every one.

         Throughout many changes the tendency in modern times has
remained a levelling one. These changes themselves have not, however, all of
them, been levelling, for they are none of them abstract enough, each having
a certain concrete reality. To some extent it is true that the levelling process
goes on when one great man attacks another, so that both are weakened, or
when one is neutralized by the other, or when an association of people, in
themselves weak, grow stronger than the eminent. Levelling can also be
accomplished by one particular caste, e.g. the clergy, the bourgeois, the
peasants, by the people themselves. But all that is only the first movement of
an abstract power within the concreteness of individuality.

           In order that everything should be reduced to the same level, it is
first of all necessary to procure a phantom, its spirit, a monstrous abstraction,
an all-embracing something which is nothing, a mirage — and that phantom is
the public. It is only in an age which is without passion, yet reflective, that
such a phantom can develop itself with the help of the Press which itself
becomes an abstraction. In times of passion and tumult and enthusiasm, even
when a people desire to realize a fruitless idea and lay waste and destroy
everything: even then there is no such thing as a public. There are parties and
they are concrete. The Press, in times such as those, takes on a concrete
character according to the division of parties. But just as sedentary
professional people are the first to take up any fantastic illusion which comes
their way, so a passionless, sedentary, reflective age, in which only the Press
exhibits a vague sort of life, fosters this phantom. The public is, in fact, the
real Levelling Master rather than the actual leveller, for whenever levelling is
only approximately accomplished it is done by something, but the public is a
monstrous nothing. The public is a concept which could not have occurred in
antiquity because the people en masse, in corpore, took part in any situation
which arose, and were responsible for the actions of the individual, and,
moreover, the individual was personally present and had to submit at once to
applause or disapproval for his decision. Only when the sense of association in
society is no longer strong enough to give life to concrete realities is the Press
able to create that abstraction ‘ the public’, consisting of unreal individuals
who never are and never can be united in an actual situation or organization
— and yet are held together as a whole.

          The public is a host, more numerous than all the peoples together,
but it is a body which can never be reviewed, it cannot even be represented,
because it is an abstraction. Nevertheless, when the age is reflective and
passionless and destroys everything concrete, the public becomes everything
and is supposed to include everything. And that again shows how the
individual is thrown back upon himself.

           The real moment in time and the real situation being simultaneous
with real people, each of whom is something: that is what helps to sustain the
individual. But the existence of a public produces neither a situation nor
simultaneity. The individual reader of the Press is not the public, and even
though little by little a number of individuals or even all of them should read it,
the simultaneity is lacking. Years might be spent gathering the public together,
and still it would not be there. This abstraction, which the individuals so
illogically form, quite rightly repulses the individual instead of coming to his
help. The man who has no opinion of an event at the actual moment accepts
the opinion of the majority, or, if he is quarrelsome, of the minority. But it must
be remembered that both majority and minority are real people, and that is
why the individual is assisted by adhering to them. A public, on the contrary, is
an abstraction. To adopt the opinion of this or that man means that one knows
that they will be subjected to the same dangers as oneself, that they will be
led astray with one if the opinion leads astray. But to adopt the same opinion
as the public is a deceptive consolation because the public is only there in
abstracto. Whilst, therefore, no majority has ever been so certain of being
right and victorious as the public, that is not much consolation to the
individual, for a public is a phantom which forbids all personal contact. And if a
man adopts public opinion today and is hissed to-morrow he is hissed by the
public.

         A generation, a people, an assembly of the people, a meeting or a
man, are responsible for what they are and can be made ashamed if they are
inconstant and unfaithful; but a public remains a public. A people, an assembly
or a man can change to such an extent that one may say: they are no longer
the same; a public on the other hand can become the very opposite and still
be the same — a public. But it is precisely by means of this abstraction and
this abstract discipline that the individual will be formed (in so far as the
individual is not already formed by his inner life), if he does not succumb in
the process, taught to be content, in the highest religious sense, with himself
and his relation to God, to be at one with himself instead of being in
agreement with a public which destroys everything that is relative, concrete
and particular in life; educated to find peace within himself and with God,
instead of counting hands. And the ultimate difference between the modern
world and antiquity is: that ‘the whole’ is not concrete and is therefore unable
to support the individual, or to educate him as the concrete should (though
without developing him absolutely), but is an abstraction which by its abstract
equality repels him and thus helps him to be educated absolutely — unless he
succumbs in the process. The taedium vitae so constant in antiquity was due
to the fact that the outstanding individual was what others could not be; the
inspiration of modern times will be that any man who finds himself, religiously
speaking, has only achieved what every one can achieve.

          A public is neither a nation, nor a generation, nor a community, nor a
society, nor these particular men, for all these are only what they are through
the concrete; no single person who belongs to the public makes a real
commitment; for some hours of the day, perhaps, he belongs to the public —
at moments when he is nothing else, since when he really is what he is he
does not form part of the public. Made up of such individuals, of individuals at
the moments when they are nothing, a public is a kind of gigantic something,
an abstract and deserted void which is everything and nothing. But on this
basis any one can arrogate to himself a public, and just as the Roman Church
chimerically extended its frontiers by appointing bishops in partibus
infidelium, so a public is something which every one can claim, and even a
drunken sailor exhibiting a ‘peep-show’ has dialectically absolutely the same
right to a public as the greatest man; he has just as logical a right to put all
those many noughts in front of his single number.

         A public is everything and nothing, the most dangerous of all powers
and the most insignificant: one can speak to a whole nation in the name of the
public, and still the public will be less than a single real man, however
unimportant. The qualification ‘public’ is produced by the deceptive juggling of
an age of reflection, which makes it appear flattering to the individual who in
this way can arrogate to himself this monster, in comparison with which
concrete realities seem poor. The public is the fairy story of an age of
understanding, which in imagination makes the individual into something even
greater than a king above his people2 but the public is also a gruesome
abstraction through which the individual will receive his religious formation —
or sink.

          The Press is an abstraction (since a paper is not a concrete part of a
nation and only in an abstract sense an individual) which in conjunction with
the passionless and reflective character of the age produces that abstract
phantom: a public which in its turn is really the levelling power. Consequently
it has an importance apart from its negative religious importance.

         The fewer ideas there are at any time, the more indolent and
exhausted by bursts of enthusiasm will it be; nevertheless, if we imagine the
Press growing weaker and weaker because no events or ideas catch hold of
2
  As an author I have fortunately never sought for or had a public, but have contented myself
with ‘the individual’, and on account of that limitation have almost become a proverb [All
Kierkegaard’s religious discourses, which form a large part of his works, were dedicated to
“that individual, ‘whom with joy and thankfulness I call my reader because he reads, not
thinking of the author, but of God”].
the age, the more easily will the process of levelling become a harmful
pleasure, a form of sensual intoxication which flames up for a moment, simply
making the evil worse and the conditions of salvation more difficult and the
probability of decline more certain. Although the demoralization brought about
by autocracy and the decay of revolutionary periods have often been
described, the decay of an age without passion is something just as harmful,
though, on account of its ambiguity, it is less obvious.

           It may not be without interest to consider this point. More and more
individuals, owing to their bloodless indolence, will aspire to be nothing at all
— in order to become the public: that abstract whole formed in the most
ludicrous way, by all participants becoming a third party (an onlooker). This
indolent mass which understands nothing and does nothing itself, this gallery,
is on the look-out for distraction and soon abandons itself to the idea that
everything that any one does is done in order to give it (the public) something
to gossip about. That indolent mass sits with its legs crossed, wearing an air of
superiority, and anyone who tries to work, whether king, official, school-
teacher or the better type of journalist, the poet or the artist, has to struggle
to drag the public along with it, while the public thinks in its own superior way
that it is the horse.

          If I tried to imagine the public as a particular person (for although
some better individuals momentarily belong to the public they nevertheless
have something concrete about them, which holds them in its grip even if they
have not attained the supreme religious attitude), I should perhaps think of
one of the Roman emperors, a large well-fed figure, suffering from boredom,
looking only for the sensual intoxication of laughter, since the divine gift of wit
is not earthly enough. And so for a change he wanders about, indolent rather
than bad, but with a negative desire to dominate. Every one who has read the
classical authors knows how many things a Caesar could try out in order to kill
time. In the same way the public keeps a dog to amuse it. That dog is the sum
of the literary world. 3 If there is some one superior to the rest, perhaps even a
great man, the dog is set on him and the fun begins. The dog goes for him,
snapping and tearing at his coat-tails, allowing itself every possible ill-
mannered familiarity — until the public tires, and says it may stop. That is an
example of how the public levels. Their betters and superiors in strength are
mishandled — and the dog remains a dog which even the public despises. The
levelling is therefore done by a third party; a nonexistent public levelling with
the help of a third party which in its insignificance is less than nothing, being
already more than levelled. And so the public is unrepentant, for it was after
all not the public that acted but the dog; just as one says to children—the cat’s
mother did it. The public is unrepentant — it was not really belittling any one;
it just wanted a little amusement. For had the levelling implement been
remarkably energetic, the indolent public would have been fooled because the
implement itself would have been in the way; but when their betters are held
down by the insignificant and the insignificant by itse1f, then no one is quit of
anything.

           The public is unrepentant, for it is not they who own the dog — they
only subscribe. They neither set the dog on any one, nor whistle it off —
directly. If asked they would answer: the dog is not mine, it has no master. And
if the dog had to be killed they would say: it was really a good thing that bad-
tempered dog was put down, every one wanted it killed — even the
subscribers.

          Perhaps some one, familiarizing himself with such a case, and
inclined to fix his attention upon the outstanding individual who suffered at the
hands of the public, may be of the opinion that such an ordeal is a great
misfortune. I cannot at all agree with such an opinion, for any one who really
wishes to be helped to attain the highest is in fact benefited by undergoing
such a misfortune, and must rather desire it even though people may be led to
rebel. The really terrible thing is the thought of all the lives that are or easily
may be wasted. I will not even mention those who are lost, or at any rate led
completely astray: those who play the part of the dog for money, but the
many who are helpless, thoughtless and sensual, who live superior lazy lives
and never receive any deeper impression of existence than this meaningless
grin, and all those bad people who are led into further temptation because in
their stupidity they even become self-important by commiserating with the
one who is attacked, without even understanding that in such a position the
person attacked is always the stronger, without understanding that in this
case the terrible and ironical truth applies: Weep not over him but over
yourselves.

         That is the levelling process at its lowest, for it always equates itself
to the divisor by means of which every one is reduced to a common
denominator. Eternal life is also a sort of levelling, and yet that is not so,
because the common denominator is that every one should really and
essentially be a man in a religious sense.

          Hitherto I have been dealing with the dialectical categories and
qualifications, and with their consequences, whether actually present at any
given moment or not. I shall now abandon the dialectical analysis of the
present age in order to arrive dialectically at its concrete affirmations
regarding everyday life. It is here that the darker side will be seen; but
although this cannot be denied, it is equally certain that just as reflection itself
is not evil, so a very reflective age has its lighter side, simply because a higher
degree of reflection implies greater significance than immediate passion; for
when enthusiasm intervenes to gather the powers of reflection together into a
decision, and because reflection confers, on the average, a greater capacity
for action — then, when religion enters in, it takes command of that increased
capacity for action.

         Reflection is not the evil; but a reflective condition and the deadlock
which it involves, by transforming the capacity for action into a means of
escape from action, is both corrupt and dangerous, and leads in the end to a
retrograde movement.

          The present age is essentially one of understanding lacking in
passion, and has therefore abolished the principle of contradiction. By
comparison with a passionate age, an age without passion gains in scope
what it loses in intensity. But this scope may once again become the condition
of a still higher form, if a corresponding intensity assumes control of the
extended field of activity which is put at its disposal. The abolition of the
principle of contradiction, expressed in terms of existence, means to live in
contradiction with oneself. The creative omnipotence of the differentiating
power of passion, which makes the individual completely at one with himself is
transformed into the extended scope of reflective understanding: as a result of
knowing and being everything possible, one is in contradiction with oneself,
i.e. nothing at all. The principle of contradiction strengthens the individual’s
faithfulness to himself and makes him as constant as the number three spoken
of so beautifully by Socrates, when he says that it would rather endure
anything than become four or even a large round number, and in the same
way the individual would rather suffer and be true to himself than be all
manner of things in contradiction with himself.

          What is talkativeness? It is the result of doing away with the vital
distinction between talking and keeping silent. Only some one who knows how
to remain essentially silent can really talk—and act essentially. Silence is the
essence of inwardness, of the inner life. Mere gossip anticipates real talk, and
to express what is still in thought weakens action by forestalling it. But some
one who can really talk, because he knows how to remain silent, will not talk
about a variety of things but about one thing only, and he will know when to
talk and when to remain silent. Where mere scope is concerned, talkativeness
wins the day, it jabbers on incessantly about everything and nothing. When
people’s attention is no longer turned inwards, when they are no longer
satisfied with their own inner religious lives, but turn to others and to things
outside themselves, where the relation is intellectual, in search of that
satisfaction, when nothing important ever happens to gather the threads of
life together with the finality of a catastrophe: that is the time for
talkativeness. In a passionate age great events (for they correspond to each
other) give people something to talk about. Talkativeness, on the contrary,
has, in quite another sense, plenty to talk about. And when the event is over,
and silence follows, there is still something to remember and to think about
while one remains silent. But talkativeness is afraid of the silence which
reveals its emptiness.

          The law governing artistic production applies, on a smaller scale, to
every one in daily life. Every man who has a real experience experiences at
the same time all its possibilities in an ideal sense, including the opposite
possibility. Aesthetically these possibilities are his lawful property. Not so,
however, his private and personal reality. His talk and his production both rest
upon his silence. The ideal perfection of his talk and of his production will
correspond to his silence, and the absolute expression of that silence will be
that the ideal will include the qualitatively opposite possibility. But as soon as
the artist prostitutes his own reality he is no longer essentially productive. His
beginning is his end, and his very first word will be a sin against the modesty
of the ideal. This type of artistic production is therefore even, aesthetically
speaking, a kind of private gossip. It is easily recognized because it is not
balanced by its opposite; for ideality is the balance of opposites. For example,
if the man who is moved to write by suffering is really initiated into the realm
of ideals, he will reproduce the happiness as well as the suffering of his
experience with the same affection. The condition of his attaining this ideal is
the silence with which he shuts off his own real personality. Otherwise, in spite
of all precautions, such as changing the scene to Africa, his one-sided
predilection will be privately recognizable. For an author, like any one else,
must have his own private personality, but it must be his own 4; and just
as the entrance to a house is barred by the crossed bayonets of the guards,
the approach to a man’s personality is barred by the dialectical cross of
qualitative opposites in an ideal equilibrium.

          What is true of the greater relationship and is very clear in the above
circumstances, which is why they were instanced, is also true in a lesser
degree of the smaller ones; and, once again, silence is the conditio sine qua
non of all educated social intercourse. The more thoroughly man grasps the
ideal and the idea — in silence — the more capable will he be of reproducing
man’s daily life so that it seems as though he only talked of particular things
at a certain distance. The less ideal, the more superficial his talk, and his
conversation will become a meaningless repetition of names, of’ absolutely
reliable’ private information of what this and that person — mentioning all
their names — had said, &c. &c., and conversation in general will take on a
talkative confidential note about what one is doing or going to do, what one
would have said on a certain occasion, which particular girl one is making love
to, why nevertheless one does not want to marry. The introspection of silence
is the condition of all educated social intercourse; the exteriorized caricature
of inwardness is vulgarity and talkativeness.

          One finds excellent examples of the kind of talkativeness I am
referring to in the novel.5 It consists entirely of trivialities, people’s names are
always mentioned and they are people whose trivial way of life is interesting
because of their names. People who are talkative certainly chatter away about
something and, indeed, their one wish is to have an excuse for more gossip,
but the subject is non-existent from the ideal point of view. It always consists
of some trivial fact such as that Mr. Marsden is engaged and has given his
fiancée a Persian shawl; that Petersen, the poet, is going to write some new
poems, or that Marcussen, the actor, mispronounced a certain word last night.
If we could suppose for a moment that there was a law which did not forbid
people talking, but simply ordered that everything which was spoken about
should be treated as though it had happened fifty years ago, the gossips
would be done for, they would be in despair. On the other hand, it would not
really interfere with any one who could really talk. That an actor should have
mispronounced a word could only be interesting if there was something
interesting in the mispronunciation itself, in which case the fifty years make no
difference — but Miss Gusta, for example, would be in despair, she who had
been at the theatre that very evening, in a box with Alderman Waller’s wife;
for was it not she who noticed the slip and even noticed a member of the
chorus smiling, &c. &c. It really would be a shame and cruelty to all those silly
gossiping people who must all the same be allowed to live — and so the law is
only posited.

         With gossip, therefore, the vital distinction between what is private
and what is public is obliterated, and everything is reduced to a kind of
private-public gossip which corresponds more or less to the public of which it
forms part. The public is public opinion which interests itself in the most
private concerns. Something that nobody would dare to tell to a gathering,
that nobody could talk about, and which even the gossips would not like to
admit to having gossiped about, can perfectly well be written for the public
and, as a member of the public, people may know all about it.

          What is formlessness? It is the result of doing away with the vital
distinction between form and content. Formlessness may, therefore, unlike
madness or stupidity, have a content that is true, but the truth it contains can
never be essentially true. It will be capable of being extended so as to include
everything or touch upon everything, whereas a real content is clearly, and, if
one likes, miserably limited because of its intensity and self absorption.

          The universality of formlessness in a passionless but reflective age is
expressed, moreover, not only by the fact that the most varied ideas are found
dallying in the same company but by the diametrically opposite fact that
people find a paramount longing for and pleasure in acting on principle’. A
principle, as the word indicates, is what comes first, i.e. the substance, the
idea in the undeveloped form of feeling and of enthusiasm which drives on the
individual by its own inner power. That is entirely wanting in a passionless
individual. To him a principle is something purely external for the sake of which
he does one thing as willingly as another, and the opposite of both into the
bargain. The life of an individual without passion is not the development of a
self-revealing principle. On the contrary, his inner life is something hurrying
along, always on the move and always hurrying to do something ‘on principle’.
A principle, in that sense, becomes a monstrous something or other, an
abstraction, just like the public. And while the public is something or other so
monstrous that not all the nations of the world and all the souls in eternity put
together are as numerous, every one, even a drunken sailor, can have a
public, and the same is true of ‘a principle’. It is something immense which
even the most insignificant man can add to the most insignificant action, and
thus become tremendously self-important. When an honest insignificant man
suddenly becomes a hero for the sake of a principle, the result is quite as
comic as though fashion decreed that every one was to wear a cap with a
peak thirty feet long. If a man had a little button sewn on the inner pocket of
his coat ‘on principle’ his otherwise unimportant and quite serviceable action
would become charged with importance — it is not improbable that it would
result in the formation of a society.

       It is acting on principle’ which does away with the vital distinction
which constitutes decency. For decency is immediate (whether the
immediateness is original or acquired). It has its seat in feeling and in the
impulse and consistency of an inner enthusiasm. ‘On principle’ one can do
anything and what one does is, fundamentally, a matter of indifference, just as
a man’s life remains insignificant even though ‘on principle’ he gives his
support to all the ‘needs of the times’, even when, by virtue of being a mute
and in that capacity as ‘the organ of public opinion’ he is as well known as the
figures on a barrel-organ that can move forward and bow, plate in hand. ‘On
principle’ a man can do anything, take part in anything and himself remain
inhuman and indeterminate. ‘On principle’ a man may interest himself in the
founding of a brothel (there are plenty of social studies on the subject written
by the health authorities), and the same man can ‘on principle’ assist in the
publication of a new Hymn Book because it is supposed to be the great need
of the times. But it would be as unjustifiable to conclude from the first fact that
he was debauched as it would, perhaps, be to conclude from the second that
he read or sang hymns. In this way everything becomes permissible if done
‘on principle’. The police can go to certain places on ‘official duty’ to which no
one else can go, but as a result one cannot deduce anything from their
presence. In the same way one can do anything ‘on principle’ and avoid all
personal responsibility. People pull to pieces ‘on principle’ what they admire
personally, which is nonsensical, for while it is true that everything creative is
latently polemical, since it has to make room for the new which it is bringing
into the world, a purely destructive process is nothing and its principle is
emptiness — so what does it need space for? But modesty, repentance and
responsibility cannot easily strike root in ground where everything is done, ‘on
principle ‘.

          What is superficiality and the desire to show off? Superficiality is the
result of doing away with the vital distinction between concealment and
manifestation. It is the manifestation of emptiness, but where mere scope is
concerned it wins, because it has the advantage of dazzling people with its
brilliant shams. Real manifestation is homogeneous, because it is really
profound, whereas superficiality has a varied and omnium gatherum
appearance. Its love of showing off is the self-admiration of conceit in
reflection. The concealment and reserve of inwardness is not given time in
which to conceive an essential mystery, which can then be made manifest, but
is disturbed long before that time comes and so, as a reward, reflection
attracts the gaze of egotism upon its varied shams whenever possible.

           What is flirtation? It is the result of doing away with the vital
distinction between real love and real debauchery. Neither the real lover nor
the real debauchee are guilty of flirting. A flirtation only toys with the
possibility and is therefore a form of indulgence which dares to touch evil and
fails to realize the good. To act ‘on principle ‘is also a kind of flirtation, because
it reduces moral action to an abstraction. But in mere scope flirtation has all
the advantages, for one can flirt with anything, but one can only really love
one girl. From the point of view of love, properly understood, any addition is
really a subtraction (even though in a confused age a capricious man may be
blinded by pleasure), and the more one adds the more one takes away.

          What is reasoning? It is the result of doing away with the vital
distinction which separates subjectivity and objectivity. As a form of abstract
thought reasoning is not profoundly dialectical enough; as an opinion and a
conviction it lacks full-blooded individuality. But where mere scope is
concerned, reasoning has all the apparent advantage; for a thinker can
encompass his science, a man can have an opinion upon a particular subject
and a conviction as a result of a certain view of life, but one can reason about
anything.

          In our own day anonymity has acquired a far more pregnant
significance than is perhaps realized: it has an almost epigrammatic
significance. People not only write anonymously, they sign their anonymous
works: they even talk anonymously. The very soul of a writer should go into his
style, and a man puts his whole personality into the style of his conversation,
though limited by the exception which Matthias Claudius noted when he said
that if any one conjured a book its esprit should appear— unless there was no
esprit in it. Nowadays one can talk with any one, and it must be admitted that
people’s opinions are exceedingly sensible, yet the conversation leaves one
with the impression of having talked to an anonymity. The same person will
say the most contradictory things and, with the utmost calm, make a remark,
which coming from him is a bitter satire on his own life. The remark itself may
be sensible enough, and of the kind that sounds well at a meeting, and may
serve in a discussion preliminary to coming to a decision, in much the same
way that paper is made out of rags. But all these opinions put together do not
make one human, personal opinion such as you may hear from quite a simple
man who talks about very little but really does talk. People’s remarks are so
objective, so all-inclusive, that it is a matter of complete indifference who
expresses them, and where human speech is concerned that is the same as
acting ‘on principle’. And so our talk becomes like the public, a pure
abstraction. There is no longer any one who knows how to talk, and instead,
objective thought produces an atmosphere, an abstract sound, which makes
human speech superfluous, just as machinery makes man superfluous. In
Germany they even have phrase-books for the use drivers, and it will end with
lovers sitting together talking anonymously. In fact there are handbooks for
everything, and very soon education, all the world over, will consist in learning
a greater or lesser number of comments by heart, and people will excel
according to their capacity for singling out the various facts like a printer
singling out the letters, but completely ignorant of the meaning of anything.

         Thus our own age is essentially one of understanding, and on the
average, perhaps, more knowledgeable than any former generation, but it is
without passion. Every one knows a great deal, we all know which way we
ought to go and all the different ways we can go, but nobody is willing to
move. If at last some one were to overcome the reflection within him and
happened to act, then immediately thousands of reflections would form an
outward obstacle. Only a proposal to reconsider a plan is greeted with
enthusiasm; action is met by indolence. Some of the superior and self-satisfied
find the enthusiasm of the man who tried to act ridiculous, others are envious
because he made a beginning when, after all, they knew just as well as he did
what should be done — but did not do it. Still others use the fact that some
one has acted in order to produce numerous critical observations and give
vent to a store of arguments, demonstrating how much more sensibly the
thing could have been done; others again, busy themselves guessing the
outcome and, if possible, influencing events a little so as to favour their own
hypothesis.

          It is said that two English noblemen were once riding along a road
when they met a man whose horse had run away with him and who, being in
danger of falling off, shouted for help. One of the Englishmen turned to the
other and said, ‘A hundred guineas he falls off.’ ‘Taken,’ said the other. With
that they spurred their horses to a gallop and hurried on ahead to open the
toil-gates and to prevent anything from getting in the way of the runaway
horse. In the same way, though without that heroic and millionaire-like spleen,
our own reflective and sensible age is like a curious, critical and worldly-wise
person who, at the most, has vitality enough to lay a wager.

         Life’s existential tasks have lost the interest of reality; illusion cannot
build a sanctuary for the divine growth of inwardness which ripens to
decisions. One man is curious about another, every one is undecided, and
their way of escape is to say that some one must come who will do something
— and then they will bet on him.

          It is quite impossible for the community or the idea of association to
save our age. On the contrary, association is the scepticism, which is
necessary in order that the development of individuality may proceed
uniformly, so that the individual will either be lost or, disciplined by such
abstractions, will find himself religiously. Nowadays the principle of association
(which at the most is only valid where material interests are concerned) is not
positive but negative; it is an escape, a distraction and an illusion. Dialectically
the position is this: the principle of association, by strengthening the
individual, enervates him; it strengthens numerically, but ethically that is a
weakening. It is only after the individual has acquired an ethical outlook, in
face of the whole world, that there can be any suggestion of really joining
together. Otherwise the association of individuals who are in themselves weak,
is just as disgusting and as harmful as the marriage of children.

          Formerly the sovereign and the great each had their opinion and the
rest were satisfied and decided enough to realize that they dared not or could
not have an opinion. Now every one can have an opinion; but they have to
band together numerically in order to have one. Twenty-five signatures make
the most frightful stupidity into an opinion, and the considered opinion of a
first-class mind is only a paradox. But when the context is meaningless it is
useless to take a broad survey. The best that can be done is to consider each
part of speech by itself. And if only nonsense comes out of a man’s mouth it is
useless to try and make a coherent speech, and it is better to take each word
separately — and so with individuals.

           The change which will come about is this. In the old order (which
sprang from the relation between the individual and the generation) the
officers, generals, heroes (i.e. the man of distinction, the leader within his own
sphere) were recognizable, and every one (in proportion to his authority), with
his little detachment, fitted picturesquely and organically into the whole, both
supporting and supported by the whole. From now on the great man, the
leader (according to his position) will be without authority because he will
have divinely understood the diabolical principle of the levelling process; he
will be unrecognizable; he will keep his distinction hidden like a plain-clothes
policeman, and his support will only be negative, i.e. repelling people, whereas
the infinite indifference of abstraction judges every individual and examines
him in his isolation. This order is dialectically the very opposite of that of the
Prophets and Judges, and just as the danger for them lay in their authority not
being recognized so nowadays the unrecognizable is in danger of being
recognized, and of being persuaded to accept recognition and importance as
an authority, which could only hinder the highest development. For they are
unrecognizable and go about their work like secret agents, not because of any
private instruction from God! — for that is the case of Prophets and Judges —
but are unrecognizable (without authority) because they have understood the
universal in equality before God, and, because they realize this and their own
responsibility every moment, are thus prevented from being guilty of
thoughtlessly realizing in an inconsistent form this consistent perception. This
order is dialectically the opposite of the organizing order symbolized in the
outstanding personality, which makes the generation into a support for the
individual, whereas now, like an abstraction, the generation is negatively
supported by the unrecognizable, and turns polemically against the individual
— in order to save every single individual religiously.

          And so when the generation, which itself desired to level and to be
emancipated, to destroy authority and at the same time itself, has, through
the scepticism of the principle association, started the hopeless forest fire of
abstraction; when as a result of levelling with this scepticism, the generation
has rid itself of the individual and of everything organic and concrete, and put
in its place ‘humanity’ and the numerical equality of man and man: when the
generation has, for a moment, delighted in this unlimited panorama of
abstract infinity, unrelieved by even the smallest eminence, undisturbed by
even the slightest interest, a sea of desert; then the time has come for work to
begin, for every individual must work for himself, each for himself. No longer
can the individual, as in former times, turn to the great for help when he grows
confused. That is past; he is either lost in the dizziness of unending abstraction
or saved for ever in the reality of religion. Perhaps very many will cry out in
despair, but it will not help them — already it is too late. If it is true that in
former times authorities and powers were misused and brought upon
themselves the nemesis of revolution, it was weakness and impotence which,
desiring to stand alone, brought this final nemesis upon them. Nor shall any of
the unrecognizable presume to help directly or to speak directly or to teach
directly at the head of the masses, in order to direct their decisions, instead of
giving his negative support and so helping the individual to make the decision
which he himself has reached; any other course would be the end of him,
because he would be indulging in the short-sighted compassion of man,
instead of obeying the order of divinity, of an angry, yet so merciful, divinity.
For the development is, in spite of everything, a progress because all the
individuals who are saved will receive the specific weight of religion, its
essence at first hand, from God himself. Then it will be said: ‘ behold, all is in
readiness, see how the cruelty of abstraction makes the true form of
worldliness only too evident, the abyss of eternity opens before you, the sharp
scythe of the leveller makes it possible for every one individually to leap over
the blade — and behold, it is God who waits. Leap, then, into the arms of God’.
But the ‘unrecognizable’ neither can nor dares help man, not even his most
faithful disciple, his mother, or the girl for whom he would gladly give his life:
they must make the leap themselves, for God’s love is not a second-hand gift.
And yet the ‘unrecognizable’ (according to his degree) will have a double work
compared with the ‘outstanding’ man (of the same degree), because he will
not only have to work continuously, but at the same time labour to conceal his
work.

          But the desolate abstraction of the levelling process will always be
continued by its servants, lest it should end with a return of the old order. The
servants of the levelling process are the servants of the powers of evil, for
levelling itself does not come from divinity and all good men will at times
grieve over its desolation, but divinity allows it and desires to bring the highest
into relation with the individual, i.e. with each and every man. The servants of
the levelling process are known to him who is ‘unrecognizable’, but he dare
not use either power or authority against them, for that would be to reverse
the development, since it would become immediately apparent to a third
person that the’ unrecognizable’ was an authority, and in that way the third
man would be prevented from attaining to the highest.

          Only by suffering can the ‘unrecognizable’ dare to help on the
levelling process and, by the same suffering action, judge the instruments. He
dare not overcome the levelling process directly, that would be his end, for it
would be the same as acting with authority. But he will overcome it in
suffering, and in that way express once more the law of his existence, which is
not to dominate, to guide, to lead, but to serve in suffering and help indirectly.
Those who have not made the leap will look upon his unrecognizable action,
his suffering as failure; those who have made the leap will suspect that it was
victory, but they can have no certainty, for they could only be made certain by
him, and if he gave that certainty to a single person it would be the end of
him, because he would have been unfaithful to the divinity in desiring to play
at being authority: that would mean that he had failed; not only by being
unfaithful to God in trying to use authority, but because he did not obey God
and teach men to love one another by compelling himself, so that even
though they begged him to do so he should not have deceived them by
exerting authority.

         But I break off. All this is only fooling, for if it is true that every man
must work for his own salvation, then all the prophecies about the future of
the world are only valuable and allowable as a recreation, or a joke, like
playing bowls or cards.

         But it must always be remembered that reflection is not in itself
something harmful, that, on the contrary, it is necessary to work through it in
order that one’s actions should be more intensive. The stages of all actions
which are performed with enthusiasm are as follows: first of all comes
immediate enthusiasm, then follows the stage of cleverness which, because
immediate enthusiasm does not calculate, assumes with a calculating
cleverness the appearance of being the higher; and finally comes the highest
and most intensive enthusiasm which follows the stage of cleverness, and is
therefore able to see the shrewdest plan of action but disdain it, and thereby
receive the intensity of an eternal enthusiasm. For the time being, however,
and for some time to come, this really intensive enthusiasm will remain
completely misunderstood, and the question is whether it can ever become
popular, i.e. whether one may presume upon such a degree of cleverness in
the average man that cleverness will no longer seduce and enchant him, and
may presume that he will be able to dominate it by having attained the
highest form of enthusiasm, but as it were squander it — for an enthusiastic
action, being always the opposite of shrewd, is never obvious. The enthusiasm
of Socrates was not immediate. On the contrary, he was clever enough to see
what he had to do in order to escape, although he disdained to act according
to that opinion, just as he refused the proffered speech. That is why there is
nothing obvious about his heroic death, and even in death he remained
ironical by putting to the shrewd and the clever the question whether he could
really have been clever, since he did the reverse. That is the point at which
cleverness is left hanging in mid-air, hoisted with its own reflective judgement
and that of the world about it, afraid that an action performed in the teeth of
cleverness may be confused with an action performed without cleverness. An
immediate enthusiasm does not know such a danger, and therefore requires
the impetus of the most intense enthusiasm in order to get through life. Such
an enthusiasm is not mere rhetorical twaddle about high seriousness ‘, a still
‘higher seriousness ‘and an all highest seriousness’. It can be known from its
category: that it acts against understanding. Neither does immediate
goodness know the danger of reflection — where goodness and weakness are
mistaken and confused; and it is precisely for that reason that, after reflection,
it requires a religious impetus to set goodness afloat again.

           In our times, when so little is done, an extraordinary number of
prophecies, apocalypses, glances at and studies of the future appear, and
there is nothing to do but to join in and be one with the rest. Yet I have the
advantage over the many who bear a heavy responsibility when they prophesy
and give warnings, because I can be perfectly certain that no one would think
of believing me. So I do not ask that any one should make a cross in their
calendar or otherwise bother to see whether my words are fulfilled. If they are
fulfilled, then people will have something else to think about than my
accidental being and if they are not fulfilled, well, then I shall simply be a
prophet in the modern sense of the word — for a prophet nowadays means to
prognosticate and nothing more. In a certain sense a prophet cannot do
anything else. It was providence that fulfilled the words of the older prophets,
so perhaps we modern prophets, lacking the addition coming from providence,
might say with Thales: what we predict will either happen or not; for to us too
has God granted the gift of prophecy.